Q. Highlight the Central Asian and Greco -Bactrian elements in the Gandhara art. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1 #ancient #art and culture #art & culture #history

Q. The 1857 Uprising was the culmination of the recurrent big and small local rebellions that had occurred in the preceding hundred years of British rule. Elucidate (Answer in 150 words) #2019  #gs1 #modern #history

Q. Examine the linkages between 19th centuries ‘Indian renaissance’ and emergence of national identity. (Answer in 150 words) #2019  #gs1 #modern #history

Q. Assess the impact of global warming on coral life system with examples. (Answer in 150 words) #2019  #gs1 #geography

Q.Discuss the causes of depletion of mangroves and explain their importance in maintaining coastal ecology. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #geography

Q. Can the strategy of regional-resource based manufacturing help in promoting employment in India? (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #geography #resources

Q. Discuss the factors for localization of agro-based food processing industries of North West India. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #geography #resources

Q. What makes the Indian society unique in sustaining its culture? Discuss. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #society

Q. “Empowering women is the key to control population growth”. Discuss (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #society

Q. What are the challenges to our cultural practices in the name of secularism (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs1  #society

Q. Many voices had strengthened and enriched the nationalist movement during the Gandhian phase. Elaborate (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #modern #history

Q. Assess the role of British imperial power in complicating the process of transfer of power during 1940s. (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #modern #history

Q. Explain how the foundations of modern world were laid by the American and French revolution. (Answer in 250 words) #2019 #gs1  #world history #history

Q. What is water stress? How and why does it differ regionally in India? (Answer in 250 words) #2019 #gs1  #geography #resources

Q. How can the mountain ecosystem be restored from the negative impact of development initiatives and tourism? (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #geography

Q. How is efficient and affordable urban mass transport key to the rapid economic development of India? (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #geography

Q. How do ocean currents and water masses differ in their impacts on marine life and coastal environment? Give suitable examples? (Answer in 250 words) #2019 #gs1  #geography

Q. Do we have cultural pockets of small India all over the nation? Elaborate with examples (Answer in 250 words) #2019 #gs1  #society

Q. What are the continued challenges for women in India against time and space? (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #society

Q. Are we losing our local identity for the global identity? Discuss.  (Answer in 250 words) #2019  #gs1 #society

Q. Do you think Constitution of India does not accept principle of strict separation of powers rather it is based on the principle of ‘checks and balance’? Explain. (10 Marks) #2019 #gs2  #polity

Q. “The Central Administrative Tribunal which was established for redressal of grievances and complaints by or against central government employees, nowadays is exercising its powers as an independent judicial authority.” Explain. (10 Marks)     #2019 #gs2   #polity

Q. What are the methods used by the farmer’s organizations to influence the policy-makers in India and how effective are these methods? (10 Marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity

Q. From the resolution of contentious issues regarding distribution of legislative powers by the courts, ‘Principle of Federal Supremacy’ and ‘Harmonious Construction’ have emerged. Explain. (10 Marks) #2019 #gs2   #polity #judiciary #constitution

Q. What can France learn from the Indian Constitution’s approach to secularism? (10 Marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity #governance

Q. Despite Consistent experience of high growth, India still goes with the lowest indicators of human development. Examine the issues that make balanced and inclusive development elusive. (10 Marks)  #2019 #gs2    #governance

Q. There is a growing divergence in the relationship between poverty and hunger in India. The shrinking of social expenditure by the government is forcing the poor to spend more on non-food essential items squeezing their food-budget – Elucidate. (10 marks) #2019  #gs2  #governance

Q. Implementation of Information and Communication technology (ICT) based projects/programmes usually suffers in terms of certain vital factors. Identify these factors and suggest measures for their effective implementation. (10 marks) #2019 #gs2   #governance

Q. ‘The time has come for India and Japan to build a strong contemporary relationship, one involving global and strategic partnership that will have a great significance for Asia and the world as a whole.’ Comment. (10 marks) #2019 #gs2   #ir

Q. ‘Too little cash, too much politics, leaves UNESCO fighting for life.’ Discuss the statement in the light of US’ withdrawal and its accusation of the cultural body as being ‘anti-Israel bias’. (10 marks) #2019 #gs2   #ir

Q. On what grounds a people’s representative can be disqualified under the representation of people act, 1951? Also mention the remedies available to such person against his disqualification. (15 marks) #2019 #gs2   #polity #RPA

Q. “Parliament’s power to amend the constitution is a limited power and it cannot be enlarged into absolute power”. In the light of this statement explain whether parliament under article 368 of the constitution can destroy the Basic structure of the constitution by expanding its amending power? (15 marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity #constitution

Q. “The reservation of seats for women in the institution of local self-government has had a limited impact on the patriarchal character of the Indian political process”. Comment. (15 marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity #constitution

Q. “The Attorney-General is the chief legal adviser and lawyer of the Government of India.” Discuss  (15 Marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity #constitution

Q. Individual parliamentarian’s role as the national law maker is on a decline, which in turn, has adversely impacted the quality of debates and their outcome. Discuss. (15 marks) #2019  #gs2  #polity

Q. ‘In the context of neo-liberal paradigm of developmental planning, multi-level planning is expected to make operations cost-effective and remove many implementation blockages’- Discuss (15 marks) #2019 #gs2   #governance

Q. The need for cooperation among various service sectors has been an inherent component of development discourse. Partnership bridges the gap among the sectors. It also sets in motion a culture of ‘collaboration’ and ‘team spirit’. In the light of statements above examine India’s development process. (15 marks) #2019  #gs2  #governance

Q. Performance of welfare schemes that are implemented for vulnerable sections is not so effective due to absence of their awareness and active involvement at all stages of policy process. Discuss (15 marks) #2019 #gs2   #governance

Q. “The long sustained image of India as a leader of the oppressed and marginalised nations has disappeared on account of its new found role in the emerging global order.’ Elaborate (15 Marks) #2019 #gs2   #ir

Q. What introduces friction into the ties between India and United States is that Washington is still unable to find for India a position in its global strategy, which would satisfy India’s national self-esteem and ambitions’. Explain with suitable examples. (15 Marks) #2019 #gs2   #ir

Q. Enumerate the indirect taxes which have been subsumed in the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in India. Also, comment on the revenue implications of the GST introduced in India since July 2017. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #economy

Q. Do you agree with the view that steady GDP growth and low inflation have left the Indian economy in good shape? Give reasons in support of your arguments. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #economy

Q. How far is Integrated Farming System (IFS) helpful in sustaining agricultural production? (Answer in 150 words)  #2019 #gs3 #economy #agriculture

Q. Elaborate the impact of National Watershed Project in increasing agricultural production from water-stressed areas. (Answer in 150 words)  #2019 #gs3 #agriculture

Q. How was India benefitted from the contributions of Sir M.Visvesvaraya and Dr. M. S. Swaminathan in the fields of water engineering and agricultural science respectively? (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #agriculture

Q. What is India’s plan to have its own space station and how will it benefit our space programme? (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #science and tech

Q.  Coastal sand mining, whether legal or illegal, poses one of the biggest threats to our environment. Analyse the impact of sand mining along the Indian coasts, citing specific examples. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #environment

Q. Vulnerability is an essential element for defining disaster impacts and its threat to people. How and in what ways can vulnerability to disasters be characterized? Discuss different types of vulnerability with reference to disasters. (Answer in 150 words)  #2019 #gs3 #disaster management

Q. The banning of ‘Jamaat-e – islaami’ in Jammu and Kashmir brought into focus the role of over-ground workers (OGWs) in assisting terrorist organizations. Examine the role played by OGWs in assisting terrorist organizations in insurgency affected areas. Discuss measures to neutralize influence of OGWs. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #internal security

Q. What is CyberDome Project? Explain how it can be useful in controlling internet crimes in India. (Answer in 150 words) #2019 #gs3 #science and tech #internal security

Q. It is argued that the strategy of inclusive growth is intended to meet the objectives of inclusiveness and sustainability together. Comment on this statement. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #economy

Q. The public expenditure management is a challenge to the government of India in the context of budget making during the post-liberalization period. Clarify it. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #economy

Q. What are the reformative steps taken by the government to make food grain distribution system more effective? (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #economy #agriculture

Q. Elaborate the policy taken by the government of India to meet the challenges of the food processing sector. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #agriculture

Q. How is the government of India protecting traditional knowledge of medicine from patenting by pharmaceutical companies? (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #science and tech

Q. How can biotechnology improve the living standards of farmers? (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #agriculture #science and tech

Q. Define the concept of carrying capacity of an ecosystem as relevant to an environment. Explain how understanding this concept is vital while planning for sustainable development of a region. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #environment

Q. Disaster preparedness is the first step in any disaster management process. Explain how hazard zonation mapping will help in disaster mitigation in the case of landslides. (Answer in 250 words) #2019 #gs3 #disaster management

Q. Indian government has recently strengthened the anti-terrorism laws by amending the unlawful activities (Prevention) act (UAPA), 1967 and the NIA Act. Analyze the changes in the context of prevailing security environment while discussing the scope and reasons for opposing the UAPA by human rights organizations. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #internal security

Q. Cross-border movement of insurgents is only one of the several security challenges facing the policing of the border in North-East India. Examine the various challenges currently emanating across the India-Myanmar border. Also discuss the steps to counter the challenges. (Answer in 250 words)  #2019 #gs3 #internal security


Q.      (a) What are the basic principles of public life? Illustrate any three with suitable examples. (150 words) (10 marks)      (b) What do you understand by the term ‘public servant’? Reflect on the expected role of public servant.  (150 words) (10 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q.   (a) Effective utilization of public finds is crucial to meet development goals. Critically examine the reasons for under- utilization and mis- utilization of public funds and their implications. (150 words) (10 marks)      (b) “Non-performance of duty by a public servant is a form of corruption”. Do you agree with this view? Justify your answer (150 words) (10 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q.     (a) What is meant by the term ‘constitutional morality’? How does one uphold constitutional morality? (150 words) (10 marks)      (b) What is meant by ‘crisis of conscience’? How does it manifest in the public domain? (150 words) (10 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q.     (a) Explain the basic principles of citizens’ charter movement and bring out its importance. (150 words) (10 marks)      (b) There is a view that the official secrets act is an obstacle to the implementation of Rights to Information act. Do you agree with the view? Discuss (150 words) (10 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q.     (a) What do you understand by probity in governance? Based on your understanding of the term, suggest measures for ensuring probity in government. (150 words) (10 marks)     (b) “Emotional Intelligence is the ability to make your emotions work for you instead of against you.” Do you agree with this view? Discuss. (150 words) (10 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q. What do each of the following quotations mean to you?      (a) “An unexamined life is not worth living.” – Socrates (150 words) (10 marks)      (b) “A man is but the product of his thoughts. What he thinks, he becomes.” – M.K.Gandhi (150 words) (10 marks)      (c) “Where there is righteousness in the heart, there is beauty in the character. When there is beauty in the character, there is harmony in the home. When there is harmony in the home, there is order in the nation. When there is order in the nation, there is peace in the world.” – A.P.J. Abdul Kalam (150 words) (10 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics

Q. You are the heading the rescue operations in a area affected by severe natural calamity, thousands of people are rendered homeless and deprived of food, drinking water and other basic amenities. Rescue work has been disrupted by heavy rainfall and damaged to supply routes. The local people are seeding with anger against the delayed limited rescue operations. When your team reaches the affected area, the people there heckle and even assault some of the team members. One of your team member is even severely injured. Faced with this crisis some team member plead with you to call off the operations freeing threats to their life.       In such trying circumstances, what will be your response? Examine the qualities of a public servant which will be required to manage the situations. (250 words) (20 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies



Q.      Honesty and uprightness are the hallmarks of a civil servants. Civil servants possessing these qualities are considered as a back bone of any strong organizations. In line of duty, they take various decisions, at time some become bonafide mistakes. As long as such decisions, are not taken intentionally and do not benefit personally, the officer cannot be said to be guilty. Though such decisions may, at times, lead to unforeseen adverse consequences in the long term.     In the recent past, a few instances have surfaced where in civil servants has been implicated for bonafide mistakes. They have often been prosecuted and even imprisoned. These instances have greatly rattled the moral fiber of the civil servants.       How does this trend affect the functioning of civil services? What measures can be taken to ensure that honest civil servants are not implicated for bonafide mistakes on their part? Justify your answer. (250 words) (20 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies



Q. An apparel manufacturing company having large number of women employees was losing sales due to various factors. The company hired a reputed marketing executive, who increased the volume of sales within a short span of time. However, some unconfirmed reports came up regarding his indulgence in sexual harassment at the work place.       After sometime a women employee launched a formal complaint to the management against the marketing executive about sexually harassing her. Faced with the companies’ indifference, in not taking cognizance of her grievances, she lodged an FIR with police.       Realizing the sensitivity and gravity of the situation, the company called the women employee to negotiate. In that she was offered a hefty sum of money to withdraw the complaint and the FIR and also give in writing that the marketing executive is not involved in the case.      Identify the ethical issues involved in this case. What options are available to the women employee? (250 words) (20 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies



Q. In a modern democratic polity there is a concept of political executive and permanent executive elected people’s representatives forms the political executive and bureaucracy forms the permanent executive. Ministers frame policy decisions and bureaucrats execute these. In the initial decades after independence, relationship between the permanent executives and the political executives were characterized by mutual understanding, respect, and cooperation, without encroaching upon each other’s domain.       However, in the subsequent decades the situation has changed. There are instances of the political executive insisting upon the permanent executives to follow its agenda. Respect for an appreciation of an upright bureaucrats has declined. There is an increasing tendency among the political executive to get involved in routine administrative matters such as transfers, posting etc. Under this scenario, there is a definitive trend towards ‘politicization of bureaucracy’. The raising materialism and acquisitiveness in social life has also adversely impacted upon the ethical values of both the permanent executive and the political executive.     What are the consequences of this ‘politicization of bureaucracy? Discuss.  (250 words) (20 marks) #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies



Q. In one of the districts of a frontier state, narcotics menace has been rampant. This has results in money laundering, mushrooming of poppy farming, arms smuggling and near stalling of education. The system is on the verge of collapse. The situation has been further worsened by unconfirmed reports that local politicians as well as some senior police officers are providing surreptitious patronage to the drug mafia. At that point of time a woman police officer, known for her skills in handling such situations is appointed as superintendent of police to bring the situation to normalcy.      If you are the same police officer, identify the various dimensions of the crisis. Based on your understanding, suggest measures to deal with the crisis. (250 words) (20 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies



Q. In recent times, there has been an increasing concern in India to develop effective civil service ethics, code of conduct, transparency measures, ethics and integrity systems and anti-corruption agencies. In view of this, there is need being felt to focus on three specific areas, which are directly relevant to the problems of internalizing integrity and ethics in the civil services. These are as follows:     1. Anticipating specific threats to ethical standards and integrity in the civil services,        2. Strengthening the ethical competence of civil servant and      3. Developing administrative processes and practices which promote ethical values and integrity in civil services.        Suggest institutional measures to address the above three issues. (250 words) (20 marks)  #2019 #gs4 #ethics #case studies


Q. Wisdom finds truth. #2019 #essay

Q. Values are not what humanity is, but what humanity ought to be.  #2019 #essay

Q. Best for an individual is not necessarily best for the society.  #2019 #essay

Q. Courage to accept and dedication to improve are two keys to success.  #2019 #essay

Q. South Asian Societies are woven not around the state, but around their plural cultures and plural identities.  #2019 #essay

Q. Neglect of primary healthcare and education in India are reasons for its backwardness.  #2019 #essay

Q. Biased media is a real threat to Indian Democracy  #2019 #essay

Q. Rise of Artificial Intelligence: the threat of jobless future or better job opportunities through reskilling and upskilling.  #2019 #essay
Q. “Caste system is assuming new identities and associational forms. Hence caste system cannot be eradicated in India.” Comment.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Despite implementation of various programmes for eradication of poverty by the government in India, poverty is still existing’. Explain by giving reasons.#2018#Indian Society
Q. How the Indian concept of secularism is different from the western model of secularism? Discuss.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Women’s movement in India has not addressed the issues of women of lower social strata.’ Substantiate your view.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Globalization is generally said to promote cultural homogenization but due to this cultural specificities appear to be strengthened in the Indian Society.’ Elucidate.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Communalism arises either due to power struggle or relative deprivation’. Argue by giving suitable illustrations. #2018#Indian Society
Q. In the context of the diversity of India, can it be said that the regions form cultural units rather than the States? Give reasons with examples for your viewpoint.#2017#Indian Society
Q. What are the two major legal initiatives by the State since Independence addressing discrimination against Scheduled Tribes (STs)?#2017#Indian Society
Q. The spirit of tolerance and love is not only an interesting feature of Indian society from very early times, but it is also playing an important part at the present. Elaborate.#2017#Indian Society
Q.  Distinguish between religiousness/religiosity and communalism giving one example of how the former has got transformed into the latter in independent India.#2017#Indian Society
Q.  To what extent globalisation has influenced the core of cultural diversity in India? Explain.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  “An essential condition to eradicate poverty is to liberate the poor from the process of deprivation.” Substantiate this statement with suitable examples.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  Why are the tribals in India referred to as ‘the Scheduled Tribes’? Indicate the major provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India for their upliftment.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  What is the basis of regionalism? Is it that unequal distribution of benefits of development on regional basis eventually promotes regionalism? Substantiate your answer.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  Describe any four cultural elements of diversity in India and rate their relative significance in building a national identity.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty OR poverty is the main cause of population increase in India.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  How do you explain the statistics that show that the sex ratio in Tribes in India is more favourable to women than the sex ratio among Scheduled Castes?#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the changes in the trends of labour migration within and outside India in the last four decades.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the positive and negative effects of globalization on women in India.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Debate the issue of whether and how contemporary movements for assertion of Dalit identity work towards annihilation of caste.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  How does patriarchy impact the position of a middle class working woman in India?#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Why do some of the most prosperous regions of India have an adverse sex ratio for women? Give your arguments.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  The life cycle of a joint family depends on economic factors rather than social values. Discuss.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the various economic and socio-cultural forces that are driving increasing feminization of agriculture in India.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  How do the Indian debates on secularism differ from the debates in the West?#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the various social problems which originated out of the speedy process of urbanization in India.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  “Male membership needs to be encouraged in order to make women’s organization free from gender bias.” Comment.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  Critically examine the effect of globalization on the aged population in India.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  Growing feeling of regionalism is an important factor in generation of demand for a separate State. Discuss.#2013#Indian Society
Q. What do you mean by Minimum Support Price (MSP)? How will MSP rescue the farmers from the low income trap?   #2018#Agriculture
Q. Examine the role of supermarkets in supply chain management of fruits, vegetables, and food items. How do they eliminate number of intermediaries?#2018#Agriculture
Q. Assess the role of National Horticulture Mission (NHM) in boosting the production, productivity and income of horticulture farms. How far has it succeeded in increasing the income of farmers? #2018#Agriculture
Q. How has the emphasis on certain crops brought about changes in cropping patterns in recent past? Elaborate the emphasis on millets production and consumption.#2018#Agriculture
Q. Explain various types of revolutions, took place in Agriculture after Independence in India. How these revolutions have helped in poverty alleviation and food security in India?#2017#Agriculture
Q. What are the major reasons for declining rice and wheat yield in the cropping system? How crop diversification is helpful to stabilise the yield of the crops in the system?#2017#Agriculture
Q. How do subsidies affect the cropping pattern, crop diversity and economy of farmers? What is the significance of crop insurance, minimum support price and food processing for small and marginal farmers?#2017#Agriculture
Q. What is water-use efficiency? Describe the role of micro-irrigation in increasing the water-use efficiency.#2016#Agriculture
Q. What is allelopathy? Discuss its role in major cropping systems of irrigated agriculture.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Discuss the role of land reforms in agricultural development Identify the factors that were responsible for the success of land reforms in India.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Given the vulnerability of Indian agriculture to vagaries of nature, discuss the need for crop insurance and bring out the salient features of the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY).#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Livestock rearing has a big potential for providing non-farm employment and income in rural areas. Discuss suggesting suitable measures to promote this sector in India.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  In view of the declining average size of land holdings in India which has made agriculture non–viable for a majority of farmers, should contract farming and land leasing be promoted in agriculture? Critically evaluate the pros and cons.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  There is also a point of view that Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMCs) set up under the State Acts have not only impeded the development of agriculture but also have been the cause of food inflation in India. Critically examine.#2014#Agriculture
Q.  “In the villages itself no form of credit organization will be suitable except the cooperative society.” — All India Rural Credit Survey. Discuss this statement in the background of agricultural finance in India. What constraints and challenges do financial institutions supplying agricultural finance face? How can technology be used to better reach and serve rural clients?#2014#Agriculture
Q.  What are the different types of agriculture subsidies given to farmers at the national and at state levels? Critically analyse the agricultural subsidy regime with reference to the distortions created by it.#2013#Agriculture
Q.  India needs to strengthen measures to promote the pink revolution in food industry for ensuring better nutrition and health. Critically elucidate the statement.#2013#Agriculture
Q.  Establish relationship between land reforms, agriculture productivity and elimination of poverty in the Indian economy. Discuss the difficulties in designing and implementation of agriculture friendly land reforms in India.#2013#Agriculture
Q. Safeguarding the Indian art heritage is the need of the moment. Discuss.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. The Bhakti movement received a remarkable re-orientation with the advent of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Discuss.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Assess the importance of the accounts of the Chinese and Arab travellers in the reconstruction of the history of India.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. How do you justify the view that the level of excellence of the Gupta numismatic art is not at all noticeable in later times?#2017#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Early Buddhist Stupa-art, while depicting folk motifs and narratives successfully expounds Buddhist ideals. Elucidate.#2016#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Krishnadeva Raya, the King of Vijayanagar, was not only an accomplished scholar himself but was also a great patron of learning and literature. Discuss.#2016#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. The ancient civilization in Indian sub-continent differed from those of Egypt, Mesopotamia and Greece in that its culture and traditions have been preserved without a breakdown to the present day. Comment.#2015#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Mesolithic rock cut architecture of India not only reflects the cultural life of the times but also a fine aesthetic sense comparable to modern painting. Critically evaluate this comment.#2015#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. To what extent has the urban planning and culture of the Indus Valley Civilization provided inputs to the present day urbanization? Discuss.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Gandhara sculpture owed as much to the Romans as to the Greeks. Explain.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Taxila university was one of the oldest universities of the world with which were associated a number of renowned learned personalities of different disciplines. Its strategic location caused its fame to flourish, but unlike Nalanda, it is not considered as a university in the modern sense. Discuss.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Sufis and medieval mystic saints failed to modify either the religious ideas and practices or the outward structure of Hindu / Muslim societies to any appreciable extent. Comment.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Though not very useful from the point of view of a connected political history of South India, the Sangam literature portrays the social and economic conditions of its time with remarkable vividness. Comment.#2013#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  (a) Discuss the ‘Tandava’ dance as recorded in early Indian inscriptions.     (b) Chola architecture represents a high watermark in the evolution of temple architecture. Discuss.#2013#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Describe various measures taken in India for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) before and after signing ‘Sendai Framework for DRR (2015-30)’. How is this framework different from ‘Hyogo Framework for Action, 2005’?#2018#Disaster Management
Q. On December 2004, tsunami brought havoc on fourteen countries including India. Discuss the factors responsible for occurrence of tsunami and its effects on life and economy. In the light of guidelines of NDMA (2010) describe the mechanisms for preparedness to reduce the risk during such events.#2017#Disaster Management
Q. The frequency of urban floods due to high intensity rainfall is increasing over the years. Discussing the reasons for urban floods, highlight the mechanisms for preparedness to reduce the risk during such events.#2016#Disaster Management
Q. With reference to National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) guidelines, discuss the measures to be adopted to mitigate the impact of recent incidents of cloudbursts in many places of Uttarakhand.#2016#Disaster Management
Q. The frequency of earthquakes appears to have increased in the Indian subcontinent. However, India’s preparedness for mitigating their impact has significant gaps. Discuss various aspects.#2015#Disaster Management
Q. Drought has been recognized as a disaster in view of its spatial expanse, temporal duration, slow onset and lasting effects on vulnerable sections. With a focus on the September 2010 guidelines from the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), discuss the mechanisms for preparedness to deal with likely El Niño and La Niña fallouts in India.#2014#Disaster Management
Q. How important are vulnerability and risk assessment for pre-disaster management? As an administrator, what are key areas that you would focus on in a Disaster Management System.#2013#Disaster Management
Q. What are the impediments disposing the huge quantities of discarded solid waste which are continuously being generated? How do we remove safely the toxic wastes that have been accumulated in our habitable environment?            #2018#Environment and Ecology
Q. What is wetland? Explain the Ramsar concept of ‘wise use’ in the context of wetland conservation. Cite two examples of Ramsar sites from India. #2018#Environment and Ecology
Q. Sikkim is the first ‘Organic State’ in India. What are the ecological and economical benefits of Organic State? #2018#Environment and Ecology
Q. How does biodiversity vary in India? How is the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 helpful in conservation of flora and fauna?#2018#Environment and Ecology
Q. Not many years ago, river linking was a concept but it is becoming reality in the country. Discuss the advantages of river linking and its possible impact on the environment.#2017#Environment and Ecology
Q. ‘Climate change’ is a global problem. How India will be affected by climate change? How Himalayan and coastal states of India will be affected by climate change?#2017#Environment and Ecology
Q. Rehabilitation of human settlements is one of the important environmental impacts which always attracts controversy while planning major projects. Discuss the measures suggested for mitigation of this impact while proposing major developmental projects.#2016#Environment and Ecology
Q. Discuss the Namami Gange and National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) programmes and causes of mixed results from the previous schemes. What quantum leaps can help preserve the river Ganga better than incremental inputs?#2015#Environment and Ecology
Q. Environmental Impact Assessment studies are increasingly undertaken before a project is cleared by the Government. Discuss the environmental impacts of coal-fired thermal plants located at coal pitheads.#2014#Environment and Ecology
Q.  What are the consequences of Illegal mining? Discuss the Ministry of Environment and Forests’ concept of GO AND NO GO zones for coal mining sector.#2013#Environment and Ecology
Q.  Enumerate the National Water Policy of India. Taking river Ganges as an example, discuss the strategies which may be adopted for river water pollution control and management. What are the legal provisions of management and handling of hazardous wastes in India?#2013#Environment and Ecology
Q. (a) State the three basic values, universal in nature, in the context of civil services and bring out their importance.     (b) Distinguish between “Code of ethics” and “Code of conduct” with suitable examples.     #2018#Ethics - I
Q. (a) What is meant by public interest? What are the principles and procedures to be followed by civil servants in public interest?      (b) “The Right to Information Act is not all about citizens’ empowerment alone, it essentially redefines the concept of accountability.” Discuss#2018#Ethics - I
Q. (a) What is meant by conflict of interest? Illustrate with examples, the difference between the actual and potential conflicts of interest.     (b) “In looking for people to hire, you look for three qualities: integrity, intelligence and energy. And if they do not have the first, the other two will kill you.” —Warren Buffet#2018#Ethics - I
Q. (a) “In doing a good thing, everything is permitted which is not prohibited expressly or by clear implication.” Examine the statement with suitable examples in the context of a public servant discharging his/her duties.     (b) With regard to morality of actions, one view is that means are of paramount importance and the other view is that the ends justify the means. Which view do you think is more appropriate? Justify your answer. #2018#Ethics - I
Q. (a) Suppose the Government of India is thinking of constructing a dam in a mountain valley bound by forests and inhabited by ethnic communities. What rational policy should it resort to in dealing with unforeseen contingencies?      (b) Explain the process of resolving ethical dilemmas in Public Administration.#2018#Ethics - I
Q. What do each of the following quotations means to you in the present context?     (a) “The true rule, in determining to embrace, or reject any thing, is not whether it has any evil in it; but whether it has more evil than good. There are few things wholly evil or wholly good. Almost every thing, especially of government policy, is an inseparable compound of the two; so that our best judgment of the preponderance between them is continually demanded.” – Abraham Lincoln.  #2018#Ethics - I
Q. Conflict of interest in the public sector arises when     (a) official duties,#2017#Ethics - I
Q. Examine the relevance of the following in the context of civil service:     (a) Transparency#2017#Ethics - I
Q. Young people with ethical conduct are not willing to come forward to join active politics. Suggest steps to motivate them to come forward.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) One of the tests of integrity is complete refusal to be compromised. Explain with reference to a real life example.     (b) Corporate social responsibility makes companies more profitable and sustainable. Analyse.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) “Great ambition is the passion of a great character. Those endowed with it may perform very good or very bad acts. All depends on the principles which direct them.” – Napoleon Bonaparte.     Stating examples mention the rulers (i) who have harmed society and country, (ii) who worked for the development of society and country.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) How will you apply emotional intelligence in administrative practices?     (b) Strength, peace and security are considered to be the pillars of international relations. Elucidate.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) The crisis of ethical values in modern times is traced to a narrow perception of the good life. Discuss.     (b) Increased national wealth did not result in equitable distribution of its benefits. It has created only some “enclaves of modernity and prosperity for a small minority at the cost of the majority.” Justify.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) Discipline generally implies following the order and subordination. However, it may be counter-productive for the organisation. Discuss.     (b) Without commonly shared and widely entrenched moral values and obligations, neither the law, nor democratic government, nor even the market economy will function properly.#2017#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) Explain how ethics contributes to social and human well-being.     (b) Why should impartiality and non-partisanship be considered as foundational values in public services, especially in the present day socio-political context? Illustrate your answer with examples.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) What do you understand by the terms ‘governance’, ‘good governance’ and ‘ethical governance’?     (b) Discuss Mahatma Gandhi’s Concept of seven sin.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) Analyse John Rawls’s concept of social justice in the Indian context.     (b) Discuss the Public Services Code as recommended by the 2nd Administrative Reforms Commission.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) “Corruption causes misuse of government treasury, administrative inefficiency and obstruction in the path of national development.” Discuss Kautilya’s views.     (b) How could social influence and persuasion contribute to the success of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan?#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  Law and Ethics are considered to be the two tools for controlling human conduct so as to make it conducive to civilized social existence.     (a) Discuss how they achieve this objective.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  Our attitudes towards life, work, other people and society are generally shaped unconsciously by the family and the social surroundings in which we grow up. Some of these unconsciously acquired attitudes and values are often undesirable in the citizens of a modern democratic and egalitarian society.     (a) Discuss such undesirable values prevalent in today's educated Indians.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  Anger is a harmful negative emotion. It is injurious to both personal life and work life.     (a) Discuss how it leads to negative emotions and undesirable behaviours.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  “Max Weber said that it is not wise to apply to public administration the sort of moral and ethical norms we apply to matters of personal conscience. It is important to realize that the state bureaucracy might possess its own independent bureaucratic morality.” Critically analyse this statement.#2016#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) What is meant by ‘environmental ethics’? Why is it important to study? Discuss any one environmental issue from the viewpoint of environmental ethics.     (b) Differentiate between the following:#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  Given are two quotations of moral thinkers/philosophers. For each of these, bring out what it means to you in the present context:     (a) “The weak can never forgive; forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.”#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) “A mere compliance with law is not enough, the public servant also has to have a well-developed sensibility to ethical issues for effective discharge of duties.” Do you agree? Explain with the help of two examples, where (i) an act is ethically right, but not legally and (ii) an act is legally right, but not ethically.     (b) How do the virtues of trustworthiness and fortitude get manifested in public service? Explain with examples.#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) “Social values are more important than economic values.” Discuss the above statement with examples in the context of inclusive growth of a nation.     (b) Some recent developments such as introduction of RTI Act, media and judicial activism, etc., are proving helpful in bringing about greater transparency and accountability in the functioning of the government. However, it is also being observed that at times the mechanisms are misused. Another negative effect is that the officers are now afraid to take prompt decisions. Analyze this situation in detail and suggest how this dichotomy can be resolved. Suggest how these negative impacts can be minimized.#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  Two different kinds of attitudes exhibited by public servants towards their work have been identified as the bureaucratic attitude and the democratic attitude.     (a) Distinguish between these two terms and write their merits and demerits,#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  Today we find that in spite of various measures like prescribing codes of conduct, setting up vigilence cells/commissions, RTI, active media and strengthening of legal mechanisms, corrupt practices are not coming under control.     (a) Evaluate the effectiveness of these measures with justifications.#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  At the international level, the bilateral relations between most nations are governed on the policy of promoting one’s own national interest without any regard for the interest of other nations. This leads to conflicts and tensions between the nations. How can ethical consideration help resolve such tensions? Discuss with specific examples.#2015#Ethics - I
Q.  Public servants are likely to confront with the issues of ‘Conflict of Interest’. What do you understand by the term ‘Conflict of Interest’ and how does it manifest in the decision making by public servants? If faced with the conflict of interest situation, how would you resolve it? Explain with the help of examples.     Explain with examples. 31. (a) All human beings aspire for happiness. Do you agree? What does happiness mean to you? Explain with examples. #2014#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) In the context of defence services, 'patriotism' demands readiness to even lay down one's life in protecting the nation. According to you, what does patriotism imply in everyday civil life? Explain with illustrations and justify your answer.     (b). What do you understand by 'probity' in public life? What are the difficulties in practicing it in the present times? How can these difficulties be overcome?#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) "Integrity without knowledge is weak and useless, but knowledge without integrity is dangerous and dreadful." What do you understand by this statement? Explain your stand with illustrations from the modern context.     (b). "Human beings should always be treated as 'ends' in themselves and never as merely `means'." Explain the meaning and significance of this statement, giving its implications in the modern techno-economic society.#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) Which eminent personality has inspired you the most in the context of ethical conduct in life? Give the gist of his/her teachings. Giving specific examples, describe how you have been able to apply these teachings for your own ethical development.     (b). There is a heavy ethical responsibility on the public servants because they Occupy positions of power, handle huge amounts of public funds, and their decisions have wide-ranging impact on society and environment. What steps have you taken to improve your ethical competence to handle such responsibility?#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) The current society is plagued with widespread trust-deficit. What are the consequences of this situation for personal well-being and for societal well-being? What can you do at the personal level to make yourself trustworthy?     (b). It is often said that poverty leads to corruption. However, there is no dearth of instances where affluent and powerful people indulge in corruption in a big way. What are the basic causes of corruption among people? Support your answer with examples.#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  What factors affect the formation of a person's attitude towards social problems? In our society, contrasting attitudes are prevalent about many social problems. What contrasting attitudes do you notice about the caste system in our society? How do you explain the existence of these contrasting attitudes?#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  What does 'accountability' mean in the context of public service? What measures can be adopted to ensure individual and collective accountability of public servants?#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  We are witnessing increasing instances of sexual violence against women in the country. Despite existing legal provisions against it, the number of such incidences is on the rise. Suggest some innovative measures to tackle this menace.#2014#Ethics - I
Q.  What do you understand by ‘Values’ and ‘Ethics’? In what way is it important to be ethical along with being professionally competent?#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) What do you understand by the following terms in the context of public service?     (b) Indicate two more attributes which you consider important for public service. Justify your answer.#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  Some people feel that values keep changing with time and situation, while others strongly believe that there are certain universal and eternal human values. Give your perception in this regard with due justification.#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  What is ‘emotional intelligence’ and how can it be developed in people? How does it help an individual in taking ethical decisions?#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  (a) What do you understand by the term ‘voice of conscience’? How do you prepare yourself to heed to the voice of conscience?     (b) What is meant by ‘crisis of conscience’? Narrate one incident in your life when you were faced with such a crisis and how you resolved the same.#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  Given below are three quotations of great moral thinkers/philosophers. For each of these quotations, bring out what it means to you in the present context:     (a) “There is enough on this earth for every one’s need but for no one’s greed.” -Mahatma Gandhi#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  “The good of an individual is contained in the good of all.” what do you understand by this statement? How can this principle be implemented in public life?#2013#Ethics - I
Q.  It is often said that ‘politics’ and ‘ethics do not go together. What is your opinion in this regard? Justify your answer with illustration.#2013#Ethics - I
Q. Rakesh is a responsible district level officer, who enjoys the trust of his higher officials. Knowing his honesty, the government entrusted him with the responsibility of identifying the beneficiaries under a health care scheme meant for senior citizens.     The criteria to be a beneficiary are the following:#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. As a senior officer in the Ministry, you have access to important policy decisions and upcoming big announcements such as road construction projects before they are notified in the public domain. The Ministry is about to announce a mega road project for which the drawings are already in place. Sufficient care was taken by the planners to make use of the government land with the minimum land acquisition from private parties. Compensation rate for private parties was also finalized as per government rules. Care was also taken to minimize deforestation. Once the project is announced, it is expected that there will be a huge spurt in real estate prices in and around that area.     Meanwhile, the Minister concerned insists that you realign the road in such a way that it comes closer to his 20 acres farmhouse. He also suggests that he would facilitate the purchase of a big plot of land in your wife name at the prevailing rate which is very nominal, in and around the proposed mega road project. He also tries to convince you by saying that there is no harm in it as he is buying the land legally. He even promises to supplement your savings in case you do not have sufficient funds to buy the land. However, by the act of realignment, a lot of agricultural lands has to be acquired, thereby causing a considerable financial burden on the government, and also the displacement of the farmers. As if this is not enough, it will involve cutting down of a large number of trees denuding the area of its green cover.#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. It is a State where prohibition is in force. You are recently appointed as the Super-intendent of Police of a district notorious for illicit distillation of liquor. The illicit liquor leads to many death, reported and unreported, and causes a major problem for the district authorities.     The approach till now had been to view it as a law and order problem and tackle it accordingly. Raids, arrest, police cases, and criminal trials – all these had only limited impact. The problem remains as serious as ever.#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. A big corporate house is engaged in manufacturing industrial chemicals on a large scale. It proposes to set up an additional unit. Many states rejected its proposal due to the detrimental effect on the environment. But one state government acceded to the request and permitted the unit close to a city, brushing aside all opposition.     The unit was set up 10 years ago and was in full swing till recently. The pollution caused by the industrial effluents was affecting the land, water and crops in the area. It was also causing serious health problems to human beings and animals. This gave rise to a series of agitations demanding the closure of the plant. In a recent agitation  thousands of people took part, creating a law and order problem necessitating stern police action. Following the public outcry, the State government ordered the closure of the factory.#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. Dr X is a leading medical practitioner in a city. He has set up a charitable trust through which he plans to establish a super-speciality hospital in the city to cater to the medical needs of all sections of the society. Incidentally, that part of the State had been neglected over the years. The proposed hospital would be a boon for the region.     You are heading the tax investigation agency of that region. During an inspection of the doctor’s clinic, your officers have found out some major irregularities. A few of them are substantial which had resulted in considerable withholding of tax that should be paid by him now. The doctor is cooperative. He undertakes to pay the tax immediately.#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. Edward Snowden, a computer expert and former CIA administrator, released confidential Government documents to the press about the existence of Government surveillance programmes. According to many legal experts and the US Government, his action violated the Espionage act of 1971, which identified the leak of State secret as an act of treason. Yet, despite the fact that he broke the law, Snowden argued that he had a moral obligation to act. He gave a justification for his “whistle blowing” by stating that he had a duty “to inform the public as to that which is done in there name and that which is done against them.”     According to Snowden, the Government’s violation of privacy had to be exposed regardless of legality since more substantive issues of social action and public morality were involved here. Many agreed with Snowden. Few argued that he broke the law and compromised national security, for which he should be held accountable.#2018#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. You are an honest and responsible civil servant. You often observe the following:     (a) There is a general perception that adhering to ethical conduct one may face difficulties to oneself and cause problems for the family, whereas unfair practices may help to reach the career goals.#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. You are aspiring to become an IAS officer and you have cleared various stages and now you have been selected for the personal interview. On the day of the interview, on the way to the venue you saw an accident where a mother and child who happen to be your relatives were badly injured. They needed immediate help.     What would you have done in such a situation? Justify your action.#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. You are the head of the Human Resources department of an organization. One day one of the workers died on duty. His family was demanding compensation. However, the company denied compensation because it was revealed in investigation that he was drunk at the time of the accident. The workers of the company went on to strike demanding compensation for the family of the deceased. The Chairman of the management board has asked for your recommendation.     What recommendation would you provide to the management?#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are the manager of a spare parts company A and you have to negotiate a deal with the manager of a large manufacturing company B. The deal is highly competitive and sealing the deal is critical for your company. The deal is being worked out over a dinner. After dinner the manager of manufacturing company B offered to drop you to the hotel in his car. On the way to hotel he happens to hit motorcycle injuring the motorcyclist badly. You know the manager was driving fast and thus lost control. The law enforcement officer comes to investigate the issue and you are the sole eyewitness to it. Knowing the strict laws pertaining to road accidents you are aware that your honest account of the incident would lead to the prosecution of the manager and as a consequence the deal is likely to be jeopardised, which is of immense importance to your company.     What are the dilemmas you face? What will be your response to the situation?#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  A building permitted for three floors, while being extended illegally to 6 floors by a builder, collapses. As a consequence, a number of innocent labourers including women and children died. These labourers are migrants of different places. The government immediately announced cash relief to the aggrieved families and arrested the builder.     Give reasons for such incidents taking place across the country. Suggest measures to prevent their occurrence.#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are a Public Information Officer (PIO) in a government department. You are aware that the RTI Act 2005 envisages transparency and accountability in administration. The act has functioned as a check on the supposedly arbitrarily administrative behaviour and actions. However, as a PIO you have observed that there are citizens who filed RTI applications not for themselves but on behalf of such stakeholders who purportedly want to have access to information to further their own interests. At the same time there are these RTI activists who routinely file RTI applications and attempt to extort money from the decision makers. This type of RTI activism has affected the functioning of the administration adversely and also possibly jeopardises the genuineness of the applications which are essentially aimed at getting justice.     What measures would you suggest to separate genuine and non-genuine applications? Give merits and demerits of your suggestions.#2017#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  A fresh engineering graduate gets a job in a prestigious chemical industry. She likes the work. The salary is also good. However, after a few months she accidentally discovers that a highly toxic waste is being secretly discharged into a river nearby. This is causing health problems to the villagers downstream who depend on the river for their water needs. She is perturbed and mentions her concern to her colleagues who have been with the company for longer periods. They advise her to keep quite as anyone who mentions the topic is summarily dismissed. She cannot risk losing her job as she is the sole beard-winner for her family and has to support her ailing parents and siblings. At first, she thinks that if her seniors are keeping quiet, why should she stick out her neck. But her conscience pricks her to do something to save the river and the people who depend upon it. At heart she feels that the advice of silence given by her friends is not correct though she cannot give reasons for it. She thinks you are a wise person and seeks your advice.     (a) What arguments can you advance to show her that keeping quiet is not morally right?#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Land needed for mining, dams and other largescale projects is acquired mostly from Adivasis, hill dwellers and rural communities. The displaced persons are paid monetary compensation as per the legal provisions. However, the payment is often tardy. In any case, it cannot sustain the displaced families for long. These people do not possess marketable skills to engage in some other accusation. They end up as low paid migrant laborers. Moreover, the development goes to industries, industrialists and urban communities whereas the costs are passed on to these poor helpless people. This unjust distribution of costs and benefits is unethical.     Suppose you have been entrusted with the task of drafting a better compensation-cum-rehabilitation policy for such displaced persons, how would you approach the problem and what would be the main elements of your suggested policy?#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Suppose you are an officer in charge of implementing a social service scheme to provide support to old and destitute women. An old and illiterate woman comes to you to avail the benefits of the scheme. However, she has no documents to show that she fulfils the eligibility criteria. But after meeting her and listening to her you feel that she certainly needs support. Your enquiries also show that she is really destitute and living in a pitiable condition. You are in a dilemma as to what to do. Putting her under the scheme without necessary documents would clearly be violation of rules. But denying her the support would be cruel and inhuman.     (a) Can you think of a rational way to resolve this dilemma?#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are a young, aspiring and sincere employee in a Government office working as an assistant to the director of your department. Since you have joined recently, you need to lean and progress. Luckily your superior is very kind and ready to train you for your job. He is a very intelligent and well-informed person having knowledge of various departments. In short, you respect your boss and are looking forward to lean a lot from him.     Since you have good tuning with the boss, he started depending on you. One day due to ill health he invited you at his place for finishing some urgent work. You reached his house and before you could ring the bell you heard shouting noises. You waited for a while. After entering the house the boss greeted you and explained the work. But you were constantly disturbed by the crying of a woman. At last, you inquired with the boss but his answer did not satisfy you.#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  ABC Ltd. is a large transnational company having diversified business activities with a huge shareholder base. The company is continuously expanding the generating employment. The company, in its expansion and diversification programme, decides to establish a new plant at Vikaspuri, an area which is underdeveloped. The new plant is designed to use energy efficient technology that will help the company to save production cost by 20%. The company’s decision goes well with the Government policy of attracting investment to develop such underdeveloped regions. The government has also announced tax holiday for five years for the companies that invest in underdeveloped areas. However, the new plant may bring chaos for the inhabitants of Vikaspuri region, which is otherwise tranquil. The new plant may result in increased cost of living, aliens migrating to the region, disturbing the social and economic order. The company sensing the possible protest tried to educate the people of Vikaspuri region and public in general that how its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy would help overcome the likely difficulties of the residents of Vikaspuri region. In spite of this the protests begin and some of the residents decided to approach the judiciary as their plea before the Government did not yield any result.     (a) Identify the issues involved in the case.#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Saraswati was a successful IT professional in USA. Moved by patriotic sense of doing something for the country she returned to India. Together with some other like-minded friends, she formed an NGO to build a school for a poor rural community.The objective of the school was to provide the best quality modern education at a nominal cost. She soon discovered that she has to seek permission from a number of Government agencies. The rules and procedures were quite confusing and cumbersome. What frustrated her most were delays, callous attitude of officials and constant demand for bribes. Her experience and the experience of many others like her have deterred people from taking up social service projects.     A measure of Government control over voluntary social work is necessary. But it should not be exercised in a coercive a corrupt manner. What measures can you suggest to ensure that due control is exercised but well meaning, honest NGO efforts are not thwarted?#2016#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  A private company is known for its efficiency, transparency and employee welfare. The company though owned by a private individual has a cooperative character where employees feel a sense of ownership. The company employs nearly 700 personnel and they have voluntarily decided not to form a union.     One day suddenly in the morning, about 40 men belonging to a political party gatecrashed into the factory demanding jobs in the factory. They threatened the management and employees, and also used foul language. The employees feel demoralized. It was clear that those people who gate-crashed wanted to be on the payroll of the company as well as continue as the volunteers/members of the party The company maintains high standards in integrity and does not extend favours to civil administration that also includes law enforcement agency. Such incidents occur in public sector also.#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are the Sarpanch of a Panchayat. There is a primary school run by the government in your area. Midday meals are provided to the children attending the school. The Headmaster has now appointed a new cook in the school to prepare the meals. However, when it is found that the cook is from Dalit community, almost half of the children belonging to higher castes are not allowed to take meals by their parents. Consequently the attendance in the school falls sharply. This could result in the possibility of discontinuation of midday meal scheme, thereafter of teaching staff and subsequent closing down the school.     (a) Discuss some feasible strategies to overcome the conflict and to create right ambience.#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  One of the scientists working in the R & D laboratory of a major pharmaceutical company discovers that one of the company’s best selling veterinary drugs, B has the potential to cure a currently incurable liver disease that is prevalent in tribal areas. However, developing a variant of the drug suitable for human beings entailed a lot of research and development having a huge expenditure to the extent of f 50 crores. It was unlikely that the company would recover the costs as the disease was rampant only in poverty-stricken area having very little market otherwise. If you were the CEO, then—     (a) identify the various actions that you could take;#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  There is a disaster-prone State having frequent landslides, forest fires, cloudbursts, flash floods and earthquakes, etc. Some of these are seasonal and often unpredictable. The magnitude of the disaster is always unanticipated. During one of the seasons, a cloudburst caused devastating floods and landslides leading to high casualties. There was major damage to infrastructure like roads, bridges and power generating units. This led to more than 100000 pilgrims, tourists and other locals trapped across different routes and locations. The people trapped in your area of responsibility included senior citizens, patients in hospitals, women and children, hikers, tourists, ruling party’s regional president along with his family, additional chief secretary of the neighbouring State and prisoners in jail.     As a civil services officer of the State, what would be the order in which you would rescue these people and why? Give justifications.#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are heading a district administration in a particular department. Your senior officer calls you from the State Headquarters and tells you that a plot in Rampur village is to have a building constructed on it for a school. A visit is scheduled during which he will visit the site along with the chief engineer and the senior architect. He wants you to check out all the papers relating to it and to ensure that the visit is properly arranged. You examine the file which relates to the period before you joined the department. The land was acquired from the local Panchayat at a nominal cost and the papers show that clearance certificates are available from the two of the three authorities who have to certify the site’s suitability. There is no certification by the architect available on file. You decide to visit Rampur to ensure that all is in order as stated on file. When you visit Rampur, you find that the plot under reference is part of Thakurgarh Fort and that the walls, ramparts, etc., are running across it. The fort is well away from the main village, therefore a school here will be a serious inconvenience for the children. However, the area near the village has potential to expand into a larger residential area. The development charges on the existing plot, at the fort, will be very high and the question of heritage site has not been addressed. Moreover, the Sarpanch, at the time of acquisition of the land, was a relative of your predecessor. The whole transaction appears to have been done with some vested interest.     (a) List the likely vested interests of the concerned parties.#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are recently posted as district development officer of a district. Shortly thereafter you found that there is considerable tension in the rural areas of your district on the issue of sending girls to schools.     The elders of the village feel that many problems have come up because girls are being educated and they are stepping out of the safe environment of the household. They are of the view that the girls should be quickly married off with minimum education. The girls are also competing for jobs after education, which have traditionally remained in boys’ exclusive domain, adding to unemployment amongst male population.#2015#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Now-a-days, there is an increasing thrust on economic development all around the globe. At the same time, there is also an increasing concern about environmental degradation caused by development. Many a time, we face a direct conflict between developmental activity and environmental quality. It is neither feasible to stop or curtail the developmental process, nor it is advisable to keep degrading the environment, as it threatens our very survival.     Discuss some feasible strategies which could be adopted to eliminate this conflict and which could lead to sustainable development.#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Suppose one of your close friends, who is also aspiring for civil services, comes to you for discussing some of the issues related to ethical conduct in public service. He raises the following points:     Critically analyze the above viewpoints. On the basis of this analysis, what will be your advice to your friend?#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are a no-nonsense, honest officer. You have been transferred to a remote district to head a department that is notorious for its inefficiency and callousness. You find that the main cause of the poor state of affairs is the indiscipline of a section of employees. They do not work themselves and also disrupt the working of others. You first warned the troublemakers to mend their ways or else face disciplinary action. When the warning had little effect, you issued a show cause notice to the ringleaders. As a retaliatory measure, these troublemakers instigated a woman employee amongst them to file a complaint of sexual harassment against you with the Women's Commission. The Commission promptly seeks your explanation. The matter is also publicized in the' media to embarrass you further. Some of the options to handle this situation could be as follows:     Suggest any other possible option(s). Evaluate all of them and suggest the best course of action, giving your reasons for it.#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  (i) Suppose you are the CEO of a company that manufactures specialized electronic equipment used by a government department. You have submitted your bid for the supply of this equipment to the department. Both the quality and cost of your offer are better than those of the competitors. Yet the concerned officer is demanding a hefty bribe for approving the tender. Getting the order is important both for you and for your company. Not getting the order would mean closing a production line. It may ay also affect your own career. However, as a value-conscious person, you do not want to give bribe.     (ii) Valid arguments can be advanced both for giving the bribe and getting the order, and for refusing to pay the bribe and risking the loss of the order. What those arguments could be? Could there be any better way to get out of this dilemma? If so, outline the main elements of this third way, pointing out its merits.#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  Rameshwar successfully cleared the prestigious civil services examination and was excited about the opportunity that he would get through the civil services to serve the country. However, soon after joining the services, he realized that things are not as rosy as he had imagined.     He found a number of malpractices prevailing in the department assigned to him. For example, funds under various schemes and grants were being misapproved. The official facilities were frequently being used for personal needs by the officers and staff. After sometime, he noticed that the process of recruiting the staff was also not up to the mark. Prospective candidates were required to write an examination in which a lot of cheating was going on. Some candidates were provided external help in the examination. Rameshwar brought these incidents to the notice of his seniors. However, he was advised to keep his eyes, ears and mouth shut and ignore all these things which were taking place with the connivance of the higher-ups. Rameshwar felt highly disillusioned and uncomfortable. He comes to you seeking your advice.#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  In our country, the migration of rural people to towns and cities is increasing drastically. This is causing serious problems both in the rural as well as in the urban areas. In fact, things are becoming really unmanageable. Can you analyze this problem in detail and indicate not only the socio-economic but also the emotional and attitudinal factors responsible for this problem? Also, distinctly bring out why:     (a) Educated rural youth are trying to shift to urban areas;#2014#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  A Public Information Officer has received an application under RTI Act. Having gathered the information, the PIO discovers that the information pertains to some of the decisions taken by him, which were found to be not altogether right. There were other employees also who were party to these decisions. Disclosure of the information is likely to lead to disciplinary action with possibility of punishment against him as well as some of his colleagues. Non-disclosure or part disclosure or camouflaged disclosure of information will result into lesser punishment or no punishment.     The PIO is otherwise an honest and conscientious person but this particular decision, on which the RTI application has been filed, turned out to be wrong. He comes to you for advice.#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are working as an Executive Engineer in the construction cell of a Municipal Corporation and are presently in-charge of the construction of a flyover. There are two Junior Engineers under you who have the responsibility of day-to-day inspection of the site and are reporting to you, while you are finally reporting to the Chief Engineer who heads the cell. While the construction is heading towards completion, the Junior Engineer have been regularly reporting that all construction is taking place as per design specifications. However, in one of your surprise inspections, you have noticed some serious deviations and lacunae which, in your opinion, are likely to affect the safety of the flyover. Rectification of these lacunae at this stage would require a substantial amount of demolition and rework which will cause a tangible loss to the contractor and will also delay completion. There is a lot of public pressure on the Corporation to get this construction completed because of heavy traffic congestion in the area.     When you brought this matter to the notice of the Chief Engineer, he advised you that in his opinion it is not a very serious lapse and may be ignored. He advised for further expediting the project for completion in time. However, you are convinced that this was a serious matter which might affect public safety and should not be left unaddressed. What will you do in such a situation?#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  So far as child labor norms for hazardous industries like firecrackers industry are concerned, International Labour Organization (ILO) has set the minimum age as 18 years. In India, however, this age is 14 years. The units in industrial clusters of firecrackers can be classified into registered and non-registered entities. One typical unit is household based work     Though the law is clear on the use of child labour employment norms in registered/ non-registered units, it does not include household based works. Household based work means children working under the supervision of their parents/relative. To evade child labor norms, several units project themselves as household-based works but employ children from outside.#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are heading a leading technical institute of the country. The institute is planning to convene an interview panel shortly under your chairmanship for selection of the post of professors. A few days before the interview, you get a call from the Personal Secretary (PS) of a senior government functionary seeking your intervention in favor of the selection of a close relative of the functionary for this post. The PS also informs you that he is aware of the long pending and urgent proposal of our institute for grant of funds for modernization, which are awaiting the functionary’s approval. He assures you that he would get these proposals cleared.     (a) What are the options available to you?#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  As a senior officer in the Finance Ministry, you have access to some confidential and crucial information about policy decisions that the Government is about to announce.     These decisions are likely to have farreaching impact on the housing and construction industry. If the builders have access to this information beforehand, they can make huge profits. One of the builders has done a lot of quality work for the Government and is known to be close to your immediate superior, who asks you to disclose this information to the said builder.#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q.  You are the Executive Director of an upcoming Infotech Company which is making a name for itself in the market. Mr. A, who is a star performer, is heading the marketing team. In a short period of one year, he has helped in doubling the revenues as well as creating a high brand equity for the company so much so that you are thinking of promoting him.     However, you have been receiving information from many corners about his attitude towards the female colleagues; particularly his habit of making loose comments on women. In addition, he regularly sends indecent SMS’ to all the team members including his female colleagues. One day, late in the evening, Mrs. X, who is one of Mr. A’s Team members, comes you visibly disturbed. She complains against the continued misconduct of Mr. A, who has been making undesirable advances towards her and has even tried to touch her inappropriately in his cabin. She tenders her resignation and leaves your office.#2013#Ethics - II (Case Studies)
Q. Why is Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System (IRNSS) needed? How does it help in navigation?#2018#Geography
Q. Why is India taking keen interest in resources of Arctic region?#2018#Geography
Q. Define mantle plume and explain its role in plate tectonics. #2018#Geography
Q. What are the consequences of spreading of ‘Dead Zones’ on marine ecosystems?#2018#Geography
Q. “The ideal solution of depleting ground water resources in India is water harvesting system”. How can it be made effective in urban areas? #2018#Geography
Q. Defining blue revolution, explain the problems and strategies for pisciculture development in India. #2018#Geography
Q. What is the significance of Industrial Corridors in India? Identifying industrial corridors, explain their main characteristics. #2018#Geography
Q. Mention core strategies for the transformation of aspirational districts in India & explain the nature of convergence, collaboration & Competition for its success.#2018#Geography
Q. How does the Juno Mission of NASA help to understand the origin and evolution of the Earth?#2017#Geography
Q.  “In spite of adverse environmental impact, coal mining is still inevitable for development”. Discuss.#2017#Geography
Q.  Mention the advantages of the cultivation of pulses because of which the year 2016 was declared as the International Year of Pulses by United Nations.#2017#Geography
Q.  How does the cryosphere affect global climate?#2017#Geography
Q.  “The growth of cities as I.T. hubs has opened up new avenues of employment, but has also created new problems”. Substantiate this statement with examples.#2017#Geography
Q.  Account for variations in oceanic salinity and discuss its multidimensional effects.#2017#Geography
Q.  Petroleum refineries are not necessarily located nearer to crude oil producing areas, particularly in many of the developing countries. Explain its implications.#2017#Geography
Q.  In what way can floods be converted into a sustainable source of irrigation and all-weather inland navigation in India?#2017#Geography
Q.  What characteristics can be assigned to monsoon climate that succeeds in feeding more than 50 percent of the world population residing in Monsoon Asia?#2017#Geography
Q.  With a brief background of quality of urban life in India, introduce the objectives and strategy of the ‘Smart City Programme.’#2016#Geography
Q.  Discuss the concept of air mass and explain its role in macro-climatic changes.#2016#Geography
Q.  “The Himalayas are highly prone to landslides.” Discuss the causes and suggest suitable measures of mitigation.#2016#Geography
Q.  The effective management of land and water resources will drastically reduce the human miseries. Explain.#2016#Geography
Q.  South China Sea has assumed great geopolitical significance in the present context. Comment.#2016#Geography
Q.  Major cities of India are becoming vulnerable to flood conditions. Discuss.#2016#Geography
Q.  Present an account of the Indus Water Treaty and examine its ecological, economic and political implications in the context of changing bilateral relations.#2016#Geography
Q.  Enumerate the problems and prospects of inland water transport in India.#2016#Geography
Q.  In what way micro-watershed development projects help in water conservation in drought-prone and semi-arid regions of India?#2016#Geography
Q.  Explain the factors responsible for the origin of ocean currents? How do they influence regional climates, fishing and navigation?#2015#Geography
Q.  Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata are the three mega cities of the country but the air pollution is much more serious problem in Delhi as compared to the other two. Why is this so?#2015#Geography
Q.  India is well endowed with fresh water resources. Critically examine why it still suffers from water scarcity.#2015#Geography
Q.  The states of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand are reaching the limits of their ecological carrying capacity due to tourism. Critically evaluate.#2015#Geography
Q.  How far do you agree that the behaviour of the Indian monsoon has been changing due to humanizing landscapes? Discuss.#2015#Geography
Q.  Smart cities in India cannot sustain without smart villages. Discuss this statement in the backdrop of rural urban integration.#2015#Geography
Q.  What are the economic significances of discovery of oil in Arctic Sea and its possible environmental consequences?#2015#Geography
Q.  Most of the unusual climatic happenings are explained as an outcome of the El-Nino effect. Do you agree?#2014#Geography
Q.  Why are the world’s fold mountain systems located along the margins of continents? Bring out the association between the global distribution of fold mountains and the earthquakes and volcanoes.#2014#Geography
Q.  Explain the formation of thousands of islands in Indonesian and Philippines archipelagos.#2014#Geography
Q.  Tropical cyclones are largely confined to South China Sea, Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mexico. Why?#2014#Geography
Q.  Bring out the relationship between the shrinking Himalayan glaciers and the symptoms of climate change in the Indian sub-continent.#2014#Geography
Q.  Whereas the British planters had developed tea gardens all along the Shivaliks and Lesser Himalayas from Assam to Himachal Pradesh, in effect they did not succeed beyond the Darjeeling area. Explain.#2014#Geography
Q.  Why did the Green Revolution in India virtually by-pass the eastern region despite fertile soil and good availability of water?#2014#Geography
Q.  Account for the change in the spatial pattern of the Iron and Steel industry in the world.#2014#Geography
Q.  Critically evaluate the various resources of the oceans which can be harnessed to meet the resource crisis in the world.#2014#Geography
Q.  How does India see its place in the economic space of rising natural resource rich Africa?#2014#Geography
Q.  (a) What do you understand by the theory of ‘continental drift’? Discuss t he prominent evidences in its support. (b) The recent cyclone on east coast of India was called ‘Phailin’. How are the tropical cyclones named across the world? Elaborate.#2013#Geography
Q.  (a) Bring out the causes for the formation of heat islands in the urban habitat of the world. (b) What do you understand by the phenomenon of ‘temperature inversion’ in meteorology? How does it affect weather and the habitants of the place?#2013#Geography
Q.  Major hot deserts in northern hemisphere are located between 20-30 deg N latitudes and on the western side of the continents. Why?#2013#Geography
Q.  (a) Bring out the causes for more frequent occurrence of landslides in the Himalayas than in the Western Ghats. (b) There is no formation of deltas by rivers of the Western Ghats. Why?#2013#Geography
Q.  (a) Do you agree that there is a growing trend of opening new sugar mills in southern States of India? Discuss with justification. (b) Analyze the factors for the highly decentralized cotton textile industry in India.#2013#Geography
Q.  With growing scarcity of fossil fuels, the atomic energy is gaining more and more significance in India. Discuss the availability of raw material required for the generation of atomic energy in India and in the world.#2013#Geography
Q.  It is said that India has substantial reserves of shale oil and gas, which can feed the needs of the country for quarter century. However, tapping of the resource does not appear to be high on the agenda. Discuss critically the availability and issues involved.#2013#Geography
Q. “Policy Contradictions among various competing sectors and stakeholders have resulted in inadequate ‘protection and prevention of degradation’ to environment.” Comment with relevant illustrations.#2018#Governance
Q. E-governance is not only about utilization of the power of new technology, but also much about critical importance of the ‘use value’ of information. Explain. #2018#Governance
Q. The Citizens’ Charter is an ideal instrument of organizational transparency and accountability, but it has its own limitations. Identify the limitations and suggest measures for greater effectiveness of the Citizens’ Charter.#2018#Governance
Q. Discuss the role of Public Accounts Committee in establishing accountability of the government to the people.#2017#Governance
Q. Is the National Commission for Women able to strategise and tackle the problems that women face at both public and private spheres? Give reasons in support of your answer.#2017#Governance
Q. ‘The emergence of Self Help Groups (SHGs) in contemporary times points to the slow but steady withdrawal of the state from developmental activities’. Examine the role of the SHGs in developmental activities and the measures taken by the Government of India to promote the SHGs.#2017#Governance
Q. “Poverty Alleviation programs in India remain mere showpieces until and unless they are backed up by political will.” Discuss with reference to the performance of the major poverty alleviation program in India.#2017#Governance
Q. Initially Civil Services in India were designed to achieve the goals of neutrality and effectiveness, which seems to be lacking in the present context. Do you agree with the view that drastic reforms are required in Civil Services. Comment.#2017#Governance
Q. “In the Indian governance system, the role of non-state actors has been only marginal.” Critically examine this statement.#2016#Governance
Q.  “Demographic Dividend in India will remain only theoretical unless our manpower becomes more educated, aware, skilled and creative.” What measures have been taken by the government to enhance the capacity of our population to be more productive and employable?#2016#Governance
Q.  “Effectiveness of the government system at various levels and people’s participation in the governance system are interdependent” Discuss their relationship in the context of India.#2016#Governance
Q.  In the integrity index of Transparency International, India stands very low. Discuss briefly the legal, political, social and cultural factors that have caused the decline of public morality in India.#2016#Governance
Q.  Has the Indian governmental system responded adequately to the demands of Liberalization, Privatization and Globalization started in 1991? What can the government do to be responsive to this important change?#2016#Governance
Q.  “Traditional bureaucratic structure and culture have hampered the process of socio-economic development in India.” Comment.#2016#Governance
Q.  Examine critically the recent changes in the rules governing foreign funding of NGOs under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA), 1976.#2015#Governance
Q.  The Self Help Group (SHG) Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP), which is India’s own innovation , has proved to be one of the most effective poverty alleviation and women empowerment programmes. Elucidate.#2015#Governance
Q.  How can the role of NGOs be strengthened in India for development works relating to protection of the environment? Discuss throwing light on the major constraints.#2015#Governance
Q.  In the light of Satyam Scandal (2009), discuss the changes brought in corporate governance to ensure transparency, accountability.#2015#Governance
Q.  “If amendment bill to the Whistleblowers Protection Act, 2011 tabled in the Parliament is passed, there may be no one left to protect.” Critically evaluate.#2015#Governance
Q.  “For achieving the desired objectives, it is necessary to ensure that the regulatory institutions remain independent and autonomous.” Discuss in the light of experiences in recent past.#2015#Governance
Q.  The size of the cabinet should be as big as governmental work justifies and as big as the Prime Minister can manage as a team. How far is the efficacy of a government then inversely related to the size of the cabinet? Discuss.#2014#Governance
Q.  Though 100 percent FDI is already allowed in non-news media like a trade publication and general entertainment channel, the Government is mulling over the proposal for increased FDI in news media for quite some time. What difference would an increase in FDI make? Critically evaluate the pros and cons.#2014#Governance
Q.  The setting up of a Rail Tariff Authority to regulate fares will subject the cash strapped Indian Railways to demand subsidy for obligation to operate non-profitable routes and services. Taking into account the experience in the power sector, discuss if the proposed reform is expected to benefit the consumers, the Indian Railways or the private container operators.#2014#Governance
Q.  The penetration of Self Help Groups (SHGs) in rural areas in promoting participation in development programmes is facing socio-cultural hurdles. Examine.#2014#Governance
Q.  An athlete participates in Olympics for personal triumph and nation’s glory; victors are showered with cash incentives by various agencies, on their return. Discuss the merit of state sponsored talent hunt and its cultivation as against the rationale of a reward mechanism as encouragement.#2014#Governance
Q.  Should the premier institutes like IITs/IIMs be allowed to retain premier status, allowed more academic independence in designing courses and also decide mode/criteria of selection of students. Discuss in light of the growing challenges.#2014#Governance
Q.  Has the Cadre based Civil Services Organization been the cause of slow change in India ? Critically examine.#2014#Governance
Q.  Two parallel run schemes of the Government, viz. the Adhaar Card and NPR, one as voluntary and the other as compulsory, have led to debates at national levels and also litigations. On merits, discuss whether or not both schemes need run concurrently. Analyse the potential of the schemes to achieve developmental benefits and equitable growth.#2014#Governance
Q.  Many State Governments further bifurcate geographical administrative areas like Districts and Talukas for better governance. In light of the above, can it also be justified that more number of smaller States would bring in effective governance at State level? Discuss.#2013#Governance
Q.  Discuss the recommendations of the 13th Finance Commission which have been a departure from the previous commissions for strengthening the local government finances.#2013#Governance
Q.  The product diversification of financial institutions and insurance companies, resulting in overlapping of products and services strengthens the case for the merger of the two regulatory agencies namely SEBI and IRDA. Justify.#2013#Governance
Q.  The legitimacy and accountability of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and their patrons, the micro-finance outfits, need systematic assessment and scrutiny for the sustained success of the concept. Discuss.#2013#Governance
Q.  The Central Government frequently complains on the poor performance of the State Governments in eradicating suffering of the vulnerable sections of the society. Restructuring of Centrally sponsored schemes across the sectors for ameliorating the cause of vulnerable sections of population aims at providing flexibility to the States in better implementation. Critically evaluate.#2013#Governance
Q.  Electronic cash transfer system for the welfare schemes is an ambitious project to minimize corruption, eliminate wastage and facilitate reforms. Comment.#2013#Governance
Q.  The basis of providing urban amenities in rural areas (PURA) is rooted in establishing connectivity. Comment.#2013#Governance
Q.  Though Citizens’ charters have been formulated by many public service delivery organizations, there is no corresponding improvement in the level of citizens’ satisfaction and quality of services being provided. Analyse.#2013#Governance
Q.  ‘A national Lokpal, however strong it may be, cannot resolve the problems of immorality in public affairs.’ Discuss.#2013#Governance
Q. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) is viewed as a cardinal subset of China’s larger ‘One Belt One Road’ initiative. Give a brief description of CPEC and enumerate the reasons why India has distanced itself from the same.                      #2018#Internal Security
Q. Left Wing Extremism (LWE) is showing a downward trend, but still affects many parts of the country. Briefly explain the Government of India’s approach to counter the challenges posed by LWE. #2018#Internal Security
Q. Data security has assumed significant importance in the digitized world due to rising cyber crimes. The Justice B.N. Srikrishna Committee Report addresses issues related to data security. What, in your view, are the strengths and weaknesses of the Report relating to protection of personal data in cyber space? #2018#Internal Security
Q. India’s proximity to the two of the world’s biggest illicit opium growing states has enhanced her internal security concerns. Explain the linkages between drug trafficking and other illicit activities such as gunrunning, money laundering and human trafficking. What counter measures should be taken to prevent the same? #2018#Internal Security
Q. Discuss the potential threats of Cyber attack and the security framework to prevent it.#2017#Internal Security
Q. The North-Eastern region of India has been infested with insurgency for a very long time. Analyze the major reasons for the survival of armed insurgency in this region.#2017#Internal Security
Q. Mob violence is emerging as a serious law and order problem in India. By giving suitable examples, analyze the causes and consequences of such violence.#2017#Internal Security
Q. The scourge of terrorism is a grave challenge to national security. What solutions do you suggest to curb this growing menace? What are the major sources of terrorist funding?#2017#Internal Security
Q. The terms ‘Hot Pursuit’ and ‘Surgical Strikes’ are often used in connection with armed action against terrorist attacks. Discuss the strategic impact of such actions.#2016#Internal Security
Q.  ‘Terrorism is emerging as a competitive industry over the last few decades.” Analyse the above statement.#2016#Internal Security
Q.  Border management is a complex task due to difficult terrain and hostile relations with some countries. Elucidate the challenges and strategies for effective border management.#2016#Internal Security
Q.  Use of internet and social media by non-state actors for subversive activities is a major security concern. How have these been misused in the recent past? Suggest effective guidelines to curb the above threat.#2016#Internal Security
Q.  Discuss the advantages and security implications of cloud hosting of servers vis-a-vis in-house machine-based hosting for government businesses.#2015#Internal Security
Q.  Human right activists constantly highlight the view that the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (AFSPA) is a draconian act leading to cases of human rights abuses by the security forces. What sections of AFSPA are opposed by the activists? Critically evaluate the requirement with reference to the view held by the Apex Court.#2015#Internal Security
Q.  Religious indoctrination via digital media has resulted in Indian youth joining the ISIS. What is ISIS and its mission? How can ISIS be dangerous to the internal security of our country?#2015#Internal Security
Q.  The persisting drives of the Government for development of large industries in backward areas have resulted in isolating the tribal population and the farmers who face multiple displacements. With Malkangiri and Naxalbari foci, discuss the corrective strategies needed to win the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) doctrine affected citizens back into the mainstream of social and economic growth.#2015#Internal Security
Q.  Considering the threats cyberspace poses for the country, India needs a “Digital Armed Forces” to prevent crimes. Critically evaluate the National Cyber Security Policy, 2013 outlining the challenges perceived in its effective implementation.#2015#Internal Security
Q.  “The diverse nature of India as a multi-religious and multi-ethnic society is not immune to the impact of radicalism which is seen in her neighbourhood.” Discuss along with strategies to be adopted to counter this environment.#2014#Internal Security
Q.  International civil aviation laws provide all countries complete and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above their territory. What do you understand by ‘airspace? What are the implications of these laws on the space above this airspace? Discuss the challenges which this poses and suggest ways to contain the threat.#2014#Internal Security
Q.  How does illegal transborder migration pose a threat to India’s security? Discuss the strategies to curb this, bringing out the factors which give impetus to such migration.#2014#Internal Security
Q.  In 2012, the longitudinal marking for high-risk areas for piracy was moved from 65 degrees east to 78 degrees east in the Arabian Sea by the International Maritime Organization. What impact does this have on India’s maritime security concerns?#2014#Internal Security
Q.  China and Pakistan have entered into an agreement for development of an economic corridor. What threat does this pose for India’s security? Critically examine.#2014#Internal Security
Q.  Money laundering poses a serious security threat to a country’s economic sovereignty. What is its significance for India and what steps are required to be taken to control this menace?#2013#Internal Security
Q.  What are social networking sites and what security implications do these sites present?#2013#Internal Security
Q.  Cyber warfare is considered by some defense analysts to be a larger threat than even Al Qaeda or terrorism. What do you understand by Cyber warfare? Outline the cyber threats which India is vulnerable to and bring out the state of the country’s preparedness to deal with the same.#2013#Internal Security
Q.  Article 244 of the Indian Constitution relates to administration of scheduled areas and tribal areas. Analyse the impact of non-implementation of the provisions of the Fifth schedule on the growth of Left Wing extremism.#2013#Internal Security
Q.  How far are India’s internal security challenges linked with border management particularly in view of the long porous borders with most countries of South Asia and Myanmar?#2013#Internal Security
Q. “India’s relations with Israel have, of late, acquired a depth and diversity, which cannot be rolled back.” Discuss. #2018#International Relations
Q. A number of outside powers have entrenched themselves in Central Asia, which is a zone of interest to India. Discuss the implications, in this context, of India’s joining the Ashgabat Agreement, 2018. #2018#International Relations
Q. What are the key areas of reform if the WTO has to survive in the present context of ‘Trade War’, especially keeping in mind the interest of India? #2018#International Relations
Q. In what ways would the ongoing U.S-Iran Nuclear Pact Controversy affect the national interest of India? How should India respond to this situation?#2018#International Relations
Q. ‘China is using its economic relations and positive trade surplus as tools to develop potential military power status in Asia’. In the light of this statement, discuss its impact on India as her neighbour.#2017#International Relations
Q. What are the main functions of the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)? Explain different functional commissions attached to it.#2017#International Relations
Q. The question of India’s Energy Security Constitutes the most important part of India’s economic progress. Analyse India’s energy policy cooperation with West Asian countries.#2017#International Relations
Q. Indian Diaspora has an important role to play in South East Asian countries economy and society. Appraise the role of Indian Diaspora in South-East Asia in this context.#2017#International Relations
Q. “The broader aims and objectives of WTO are to manage and promote international trade in the era of globalization. But the Doha round of negotiations seem doomed due to differences between the developed and the developing countries.” Discuss in the Indian perspective.#2016#International Relations
Q.  Evaluate the economic and strategic dimensions of India’s Look East Policy in the context of the post Cold War international scenario.#2016#International Relations
Q.  "Increasing crossborder terrorist attacks in India and growing interference in the internal affairs of several memberstates by Pakistan are not conducive for the future of SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation)." Explain with suitable examples.#2016#International Relations
Q.  What are the aims and objectives of the McBride Commission of the UNESCO? What is India’s position on these?#2016#International Relations
Q.  Increasing interest of India in Africa has its pro and cons. Critically examine.#2015#International Relations
Q.  Discuss the impediments India is facing in its pursuit of a permanent seat in UN Security Council.#2015#International Relations
Q.  Project ‘Mausam’ is considered a unique foreign policy initiative of Indian Government to improve relationship with its neighbours. Does the project have a strategic dimension? Discuss.#2015#International Relations
Q.  Terrorist activities and mutual distrust have clouded India – Pakistan relations. To what extent the use of soft power like sports and cultural exchanges could help generate goodwill between the two countries? Discuss with suitable examples.#2015#International Relations
Q.  With respect to the South China sea, maritime territorial disputes and rising tension affirm the need for safeguarding maritime security to ensure freedom of navigation and over flight throughout the region. In this context, discuss the bilateral issues between India and China.#2014#International Relations
Q.  The aim of Information Technology Agreements (ITAs) is to lower all taxes and tariffs on information technology products by signatories to zero. What impact would such agreements have on India’s interests?#2014#International Relations
Q.  Some of the International funding agencies have special terms for economic participation stipulating a substantial component of the aid to be used for sourcing equipment from the leading countries. Discuss on merits of such terms and if, there exists a strong case not to accept such conditions in the Indian context.#2014#International Relations
Q.  India has recently signed to become founding member of New Development Bank (NDB) and also the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). How will the role of the two Banks be different? Discuss the strategic significance of these two Banks for India.#2014#International Relations
Q.  WTO is an important international institution where decisions taken affect countries in a profound manner. What is the mandate of WTO and how binding are their decisions? Critically analyse India’s stand on the latest round of talks on Food security.#2014#International Relations
Q.  The proposed withdrawal of International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) from Afghanistan in 2014 is fraught with major security implications for the countries of the region. Examine in light of the fact that India is faced with a plethora of challenges and needs to safeguard its own strategic interests.#2013#International Relations
Q.  What do you understand by ‘The String of Pearls’? How does it impact India? Briefly outline the steps taken by India to counter this.#2013#International Relations
Q.  Economic ties between India and Japan while growing in the recent years are still far below their potential. Elucidate the policy constraints which are inhibiting this growth.#2013#International Relations
Q.  The protests in Shahbag Square in Dhaka in Bangladesh reveal a fundamental split in society between the nationalists and Islamic forces. What is its significance for India?#2013#International Relations
Q.  Discuss the political developments in Maldives in the last two years. Should they be of any cause of concern to India?#2013#International Relations
Q.  In respect of India-Sri Lanka relations, discuss how domestic factors influence foreign policy.#2013#International Relations
Q.  What is meant by Gujral doctrine? Does it have any relevance today? Discuss.#2013#International Relations
Q.  The World Bank and the IMF, collectively known as the Bretton Woods Institutions, are the two inter-governmental pillars supporting the structure of the world’s economic and financial order. Superficially, the World Bank and the IMF exhibit many common characteristics, yet their role, functions and mandate are distinctly different. Elucidate.#2013#International Relations
Q. Throw light on the significance of thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi in the present times.#2018#Modern History
Q. Why indentured labour was taken by British from India to other colonies? Have they been able to preserve their cultural identity over there?#2018#Modern History
Q. Clarify how mid-eighteenth century India was beset with the spectre of a fragmented polity?#2017#Modern History
Q. Why did the ‘Moderates’ fail to carry conviction with the nation about their proclaimed ideology and political goals by the end of the nineteenth century?#2017#Modern History
Q. Examine how the decline of traditional artisanal industry in colonial India crippled the rural economy.#2017#Modern History
Q. Highlight the importance of new objective that got added to the vision of Indian independence since the twenties of the last century.#2017#Modern History
Q. The women’s questions arose in modern India as a part of the 19th century social reform movement. What were the major issues and debates concerning women in that period?#2017#Modern History
Q. Explain how the upraising of 1857 constitutes an important watershed in the evolution of British policies towards colonial India.#2016#Modern History
Q. Discuss the role of women in the freedom struggle especially during the Gandhian phase.#2016#Modern History
Q.  Highlight the difference in the approach of Subhash Chandra Bose and Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle for freedom.#2016#Modern History
Q.  How different would have been the achievement of Indian independence without Mahatma Gandhi? Discuss.#2015#Modern History
Q.  Mahatma Gandhi and Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, despite having divergent approaches and strategies, had a common goal of amelioration of the downtrodden. Elucidate.#2015#Modern History
Q.  It would have been difficult for the Constituent Assembly to complete its historic task of drafting the Constitution for Independent India in just three years but for the experience gained with the Government of India Act, 1935. Discuss.#2015#Modern History
Q.  The third battle of Panipat was fought in 1761. Why were so many empire-shaking battles fought at Panipat?#2014#Modern History
Q.  Examine critically the various facets of economic policies of the British in India from mid-eighteenth century till independence.#2014#Modern History
Q.  In what ways did the naval mutiny prove to be the last nail in the coffin of British colonial aspirations in India?#2014#Modern History
Q.  What were the major political, economic and social developments in the world which motivated the anti-colonial struggle in India?#2014#Modern History
Q.  Defying the barriers of age, gender and religion, the Indian women became the torch-bearer during the struggle for freedom in India. Discuss.#2013#Modern History
Q.  Several foreigners made India their homeland and participated in various movements. Analyze their role in the Indian struggle for freedom.#2013#Modern History
Q.  “In many ways, Lord Dalhousie was the founder of modern India.” Elaborate.#2013#Modern History
Q.  Critically discuss the objectives of Bhoodan and Gramdan Movements initiated by Acharya Vinoba Bhave and their success.#2013#Modern History
Q. In the light of recent controversy regarding the use of Electronic Voting Machine (EVM), what are the challenges before the Election Commission of India to ensure the trustworthiness of elections in India? #2018#Polity
Q. Whether National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) can enforce the implementation of constitutional reservation for the Scheduled Castes in the religious minority institutions? Examine. #2018#Polity
Q. Under what circumstances can the Financial Emergency be proclaimed by the President of India? What consequences follow when such a declaration remain in force? #2018#Polity
Q. Why do you think the committees are considered to be useful for parliamentary work? Discuss, in this context, the role of the Estimates Committee. #2018#Polity
Q. “The Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) has a very vital role to play.” Explain how this is reflected in the method and terms of his appointment as well as the range of powers he can exercise. #2018#Polity
Q. Whether the Supreme Court Judgment (July 2018) can settle the political tussle between the Lt. Governor and elected government of Delhi? Examine. #2018#Polity
Q. How far do you agree with the view that tribunals curtail the jurisdiction of ordinary courts? In view of the above, discuss the constitutional validity and competency of the tribunals in India? #2018#Polity
Q. India and USA are the two large democracies. Examine the basic tenets on which the two political systems are based. #2018#Polity
Q. How is the Finance Commission of India constituted? What do you know about the terms of reference of the recently constituted Finance Commission? Discuss. #2018#Polity
Q.  Assess the importance of the Panchayat system in India as a part of local government. Apart from government grants, what sources the Panchayats can look out for financing development projects? #2018#Polity
Q.  Multiplicity of various commissions for the vulnerable sections of the society leads to problems of overlapping jurisdiction & duplication of functions. Is it better to merge all commissions into an umbrella human rights commission? Argue your case.#2018#Polity
Q.  “The local self government system in India has not proved to be effective instrument of governance”. Critically examine the statement and give your views to improve the situation.#2017#Polity
Q.  Critically examine the Supreme Court’s judgement on ‘National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014’ with reference to appointment of judges of higher judiciary in India.#2017#Polity
Q.  ‘Simultaneous election to the Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies will limit the amount of time and money spent in electioneering but it will reduce the government’s accountability to the people’ Discuss.#2017#Polity
Q.  How do pressure groups influence Indian political process? Do you agree with this view that informal pressure groups have emerged as powerful as formal pressure groups in recent years?#2017#Polity
Q.  Explain the salient features of the constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016. Do you think it is efficacious enough ‘to remove cascading effect of taxes and provide for common national market for goods and services’?#2017#Polity
Q.  Examine the scope of Fundamental Rights in the light of the latest judgement of the Supreme Court on Right to Privacy.#2017#Polity
Q.  The Indian Constitution has provisions for holding a joint session of the two houses of the Parliament. Enumerate the occasions when this would normally happen and also the occasions when it cannot, with reasons thereof.#2017#Polity
Q.  To enhance the quality of democracy in India the Election Commission of India has proposed electoral reforms in 2016. What are the suggested reforms and how far are they significant to make democracy successful?#2017#Polity
Q.  Discuss the essentials of the 69th Constitutional Amendment Act and anomalies, if any, that have led to recent reported conflicts between the elected representatives and institution of Lieutenant Governor in the administration of Delhi. Do you think that this will give rise to a new trend in the functioning of the Indian Federal Politics?#2016#Polity
Q.  To what extent is Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, bearing marginal note “Temporary provision with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir”, temporary? Discuss the future prospects of this provision in the context of Indian polity.#2016#Polity
Q.  “The Indian party system is passing through a phase of transition which looks to be full of contradictions and paradoxes.” Discuss.#2016#Polity
Q.  Exercise of CAG’s powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and the States is derived from Article 149 of the Indian Constitution. Discuss whether audit of the Government’s policy implementation could amount to overstepping its own (CAG) jurisdiction.#2016#Polity
Q.  Discuss each adjective attached to the word ‘Republic’ in the ‘Preamble’. Are they defendable in the present circumstances?#2016#Polity
Q.  What was held in the Coelho case? In this context, can you say that judicial review is of key importance amongst the basic features of the Constitution?#2016#Polity
Q.  Did the Government of India Act, 1935 lay down a federal constitution? Discuss.#2016#Polity
Q.  What is quasi judicial body? Explain with the help of concrete examples.#2016#Polity
Q.  Discuss the possible factors that inhibit India from enacting for its citizen a uniform civil code as provided for in the Directive Principles of State Policy.#2015#Polity
Q.  The concept of cooperative federalism has been increasingly emphasised in recent years. Highlight the drawbacks in the existing structure and the extent to which cooperative federalism would answer the shortcomings.#2015#Polity
Q.  In absence of well–educated and organised local level government system, ‘Panchayats’ and ‘Samitis’ have remained mainly political institutions and not effective instruments of governance. Critically discuss.#2015#Polity
Q.  Khap panchayats have been in the news for functioning as extra–constitutional authorities, often delivering pronouncements amounting to human rights violations. Discuss critically the actions taken by the legislative, executive and the judiciary to set the things right in this regard.#2015#Polity
Q.  Resorting to ordinances has always raised concern on violation of the spirit of separation of powers doctrine. While noting the rationales justifying the power to promulgate ordinances, analyse whether the decisions of the Supreme Court on the issue have further facilitated resorting to this power. Should the power to promulgate the ordinances be repealed?#2015#Polity
Q.  What are the major changes brought in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 through the recent Ordinance promulgated by the President? How far will it improve India’s dispute resolution mechanism? Discuss.#2015#Polity
Q.  Does the right to clean environment entail legal regulation on burning crackers during Diwali? Discuss in the light of Article 21 of Indian Constitution and Judgement(s) of the Apex court in this regard.#2015#Polity
Q.  Starting from inventing the ‘basic structure’ doctrine, the judiciary has played a highly proactive role in ensuring that India develops into a thriving democracy. In light of the statement, evaluate the role played by judicial activism in achieving the ideals of democracy.#2014#Polity
Q.  Though the federal principle is dominant in our Constitution and that principle is one of its basic features, but it is equally true that federalism under the Indian Constitution leans in favour of a strong Centre, a feature that militates against the concept of strong federalism. Discuss.#2014#Polity
Q.  The ‘Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members’ as envisaged in Article 105 of the Constitution leave room for a large number of un-codified and un-enumerated privileges to continue. Assess the reasons for the absence of legal codification of the ‘parliamentary privileges’. How can this problem be addressed?#2014#Polity
Q.  What do you understand by the concept “freedom of speech and expression”? Does it cover hate speech also? Why do the films in India stand on a slightly different plane from other forms of expression? Discuss.#2014#Polity
Q.  Instances of President’s delay in commuting death sentences has come under public debate as denial of justice. Should there be a time limit specified for the President to accept/reject such petitions? Analyse.#2014#Polity
Q.  National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) in India can be most effective when its tasks are adequately supported by other mechanisms that ensure the accountability of a government. In light of the above observation assess the role of NHRC as an effective complement to the judiciary and other institutions in promoting and protecting human rights standards.#2014#Polity
Q.  The role of individual MPs (Members of Parliament) has diminished over the years and as a result healthy constructive debates on policy issues are not usually witnessed. How far can this be attributed to the anti-defection law which was legislated but with a different intention?#2013#Polity
Q.  Discuss Section 66A of IT Act, with reference to its alleged violation of Article 19 of the Constitution.#2013#Polity
Q.  Recent directives from Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas are perceived by the ‘Nagas’ as a threat to override the exceptional status enjoyed by the State. Discuss in light of Article 371A of the Indian Constitution.#2013#Polity
Q.  ‘The Supreme Court of India keeps a check on arbitrary power of the Parliament in amending the Constitution.’ Discuss critically.#2013#Polity
Q.  Constitutional mechanisms to resolve the inter-state water disputes have failed to address and solve the problems. Is the failure due to structural or process inadequacy or both? Discuss.#2013#Polity
Q.  Pressure group politics is sometimes seen as the informal face of politics. With regards to the above, assess the structure and functioning of pressure groups in India.#2013#Polity
Q. Discuss whether formation of new states in recent times is beneficial or not for the economy of India?#2018#Post Independent India
Q. Has the formation of linguistic states strengthened the cause of Indian unity?#2016#Post Independent India
Q. Write a critical note on the evolution and significance of the slogan, ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’.#2013#Post Independent India
Q. Discuss the contributions of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to pre- and post-independent India.#2013#Post Independent India
Q. Analyze the circumstances that led to the Tashkent Agreement in 1966. Discuss the highlights of the Agreement.#2013#Post Independent India
Q. Critically examine the compulsions which prompted India to play a decisive role in the emergence of Bangladesh.#2013#Post Independent India
Q. Discuss the work of ‘Bose-Einstein Statistics’ done by Prof. Satyendra Nath Bose and show how it revolutionized the field of Physics. #2018#Science & Technology
Q. Why is there so much activity in the field of biotechnology in our country? How has this activity benefitted the field of biopharma? #2018#Science & Technology
Q. With growing energy needs should India keep on expanding its nuclear energy programme? Discuss the facts and fears associated with nuclear energy?#2018#Science & Technology
Q. Stem cell therapy is gaining popularity in India to treat a wide variety of medical conditions including Leukaemia, Thalassemia, damaged cornea and several burns. Describe briefly what stem cell therapy is and what advantages it has over other treatments?#2017#Science & Technology
Q. India has achieved remarkable successes in unmanned space missions including the Chandrayaan and Mars Orbiter Mission, but has not ventured into manned space mission. What are the main obstacles to launching a manned space mission, both in terms of technology and logistics? Examine critically.#2017#Science & Technology
Q. Give an account of the growth and development of nuclear science and technology in India. What is the advantage of fast breeder reactor programme in India?#2017#Science & Technology
Q. Discuss India’s achievements in the field of Space Science and Technology. How the application of this technology has helped India in its socio-economic development?#2016#Science & Technology
Q. Why is nanotechnology one of the key technologies of the 21st century? Describe the salient features of Indian Government’s Mission on Nanoscience and Technology and the scope of its application in the development process of the country.#2016#Science & Technology
Q. What do you understand by ‘Standard Positioning System’ and ‘Precision Positioning System’ in the GPS era? Discuss the advantages India perceives from its ambitious IRNSS programme employing just seven satellites.#2015#Science & Technology
Q.  What are the areas of prohibitive labour that can be sustainably managed by robots? Discuss the initiatives that can propel research in premier research institutes for substantive and gainful innovation.#2015#Science & Technology
Q.  India’s Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL), which has a database containing formatted information on more than 2 million medicinal formulations is proving a powerful weapon in country’s fight against erroneous patents. Discuss the pros and cons of making this database publicly available under open-source licensing.#2015#Science & Technology
Q.  Scientific research in Indian universities is declining, because a career in science is not as attractive as are business professions, engineering or administration, and the universities are becoming consumer-oriented. Critically comment.#2014#Science & Technology
Q.  Can overuse and free availability of antibiotics without Doctor’s prescription, be contributors to the emergence of drug-resistant diseases in India? What are the available mechanisms for monitoring and control? Critically discuss the various issues involved.#2014#Science & Technology
Q.  In a globalized world, Intellectual Property Rights assume significance and are a source of litigation. Broadly distinguish between the terms—Copyrights, Patents and Trade Secrets.#2014#Science & Technology
Q.  Bringing out the circumstances in 2005 which forced amendment to the section 3(d) in Indian Patent Law, 1970, discuss how it has been utilized by the Supreme Court in its judgement in rejecting Novratis’ patent application for ‘Glivec’. Discuss briefly the pros and cons of the decision.#2013#Science & Technology
Q.  What do you understand by Fixed Dose Drug Combinations (FDCs)? Discuss their merits and demerits.#2013#Science & Technology
Q.  What do you understand by Umpire Decision Review System in Cricket? Discuss its various components. Explain how silicone tape on the edge of a bat may fool the system?#2013#Science & Technology
Q.  (a) What is a digital signature ? What does its authentication mean? Give various salient built-in features of a digital signature. (b) How does the 3D printing technology work? List out the advantages and disadvantages of the technology.#2013#Science & Technology
Q.  (a) What is an FRP composite material ? How are they manufactured? Discuss their applications in aviation and automobile industries. (b) What do you understand by Run-of-river hydroelectricity project? How is it different from any other hydroelectricity project?#2013#Science & Technology
Q. Appropriate local community-level healthcare intervention is a prerequisite to achieve ‘Health for All’ in India. Explain.#2018#Social Justice
Q. How far do you agree with the view that the focus on lack of availability of food as the main cause of hunger takes the attention away from ineffective human development policies in India?#2018#Social Justice
Q. ‘To ensure effective implementation of policies addressing water, sanitation and hygiene needs, the identification of beneficiary segments is to be synchronized with the anticipated outcomes’. Examine the statement in the context of the WASH scheme.#2017#Social Justice
Q. Does the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 ensure effective mechanism for empowerment and inclusion of the intended beneficiaries in the society? Discuss.#2017#Social Justice
Q. Hunger and Poverty are the biggest challenges for good governance in India still today. Evaluate how far successive governments have progressed in dealing with these humongous problems. Suggest measures for improvement.#2017#Social Justice
Q. Professor Amartya Sen has advocated important reforms in the realms of primary education and primary health care. What are your suggestions to improve their status and performance?#2016#Social Justice
Q. Examine the main provisions of the National Child Policy and throw light on the status of its implementation.#2016#Social Justice
Q. The quality of higher education in India requires major improvements to make it internationally competitive. Do you think that the entry of foreign educational institutions would help improve the quality of technical and higher education in the country? Discuss.#2015#Social Justice
Q. Public health system has limitations in providing universal health coverage. Do you think that private sector could help in bridging the gap? What other viable alternatives would you suggest?#2015#Social Justice
Q.  Though there have been several different estimates of poverty in India, all indicate reduction in poverty levels over time. Do you agree? Critically examine with reference to urban and rural poverty indicators.#2015#Social Justice
Q.  Do government’s schemes for up-lifting vulnerable and backward communities by protecting required social resources for them, lead to their exclusion in establishing businesses in urban economies?#2014#Social Justice
Q.  Identify the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that are related to health. Discuss the success of the actions taken by the Government for achieving the same.#2013#Social Justice
Q.  The concept of Mid Day Meal (MDM) scheme is almost a century old in India with early beginnings in Madras Presidency in pre-independent India. The scheme has again been given impetus in most states in the last two decades. Critically examine its twin objectives, latest mandates and success.#2013#Social Justice
Q. What problems were germane to the decolonization process in the Malay Peninsula?#2017#World History
Q. The anti-colonial struggles in West Africa were led by the new elite of Western educated Africans. Examine.#2016#World History
Q. Why did the industrial revolution first occur in England? Discuss the quality of life of the people there during the industrialization. How does it compare with that in India at present?#2015#World History
Q. To what extent can Germany be held responsible for causing the two World Wars? Discuss critically#2015#World History
Q. What were the events that led to the Suez Crisis in 1956? How did it deal a final blow to Britain’s self-image as a world power?#2014#World History
Q. The New Economic Policy – 1921 of Lenin had influenced the policies adopted by India soon after independence. Evaluate.#2014#World History
Q. “‘Latecomer’ Industrial Revolution in Japan involved certain factors that were markedly different from what West had experienced.” Analyze.#2013#World History
Q. “Africa was chopped into States artificially created by accidents of European competition.” Analyze.#2013#World History
Q. “American Revolution was an economic revolt against mercantilism.” Substantiate.#2013#World History
Q.  What policy instruments were deployed to contain the Great Economic Depression?#2013#World History
Q. “Access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy is the sine qua non to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).” Comment on the progress made in India in this regard. #2018#Economic Development
Q. Comment on the important changes introduced in respect of the Long Term Capital Gains Tax (LTCGT) and Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) in the Union Budget for 2018-2019.#2018#Economic Development
Q. How are principles followed by the NITI Aayog different from those followed by erstwhile Planning Commission in India? #2018#Economic Development
Q. How would the recent phenomena of protectionism and currency manipulations in world trade affect macroeconomic stability of India?#2018#Economic Development
Q. Among several factors for India’s potential growth, savings rate is the most effective one. Do you agree? What are the other factors available for growth potential?#2017#Economic Development
Q. Account for the failure of manufacturing sector in achieving the goal of labour-intensive exports. Suggest measures for more labour-intensive rather than capital-intensive exports.#2017#Economic Development
Q. Examine the development of Airports in India through joint ventures under Public – Private Partnership (PPP) model. What are the challenges faced by the authorities in this regard.#2017#Economic Development
Q. What are the reasons for poor acceptance of cost-effective small processing unit? How the food processing unit will be helpful to uplift the socio-economic status of poor farmers?#2017#Economic Development
Q. One of the intended objectives of Union-Budget 2017-18 is to ‘transform, energize and clean India’. Analyze the measures proposed in the Budget 2017-18 to achieve the objective.#2017#Economic Development
Q.  “Industrial growth rate has lagged behind in the overall growth of Gross-Domestic-Product (GDP) in the post-reform period” Give reasons. How far the recent changes in Industrial Policy are capable of increasing the industrial growth rate?#2017#Economic Development
Q.  What are the salient features of ‘inclusive growth’? Has India been experiencing such a growth process? Analyse and suggest measures for inclusive growth.#2017#Economic Development
Q.  How globalization has led to the reduction of employment in the formal sector of the Indian economy? Is increased informalization detrimental to the development of the country?#2016#Economic Development
Q.  Women empowerment in India needs gender budgeting. What are the requirements and status of gender budgeting in the Indian context?#2016#Economic Development
Q.  Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is necessary for bringing unbanked to the institutional finance fold. Do you agree with this for financial inclusion of the poor section of the Indian society? Give arguments to justify your opinion.#2016#Economic Development
Q.  What are ‘Smart Cities’? Examine their relevance for urban development in India. Will it increase rural-urban differences? Give arguments for ’Smart Villages’ in the light of PURA and RURBAN Mission.#2016#Economic Development
Q.  Justify the need for FDI for the development of the Indian economy. Why there is gap between MoUs signed and actual FDIs? Suggest remedial steps to be taken for increasing actual FDIs in India.#2016#Economic Development
Q.  Comment on the challenges for inclusive growth which include careless and useless manpower in the Indian context. Suggest measures to be taken for facing these challenges.#2016#Economic Development
Q.  Give an account of the current status and the targets to be achieved pertaining to renewable energy sources in the country. Discuss in brief the importance of National Programme on Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs).#2016#Economic Development
Q.  The nature of economic growth in India in recent times is often described as jobless growth. Do you agree with this view? Give arguments in favour of your answer.#2015#Economic Development
Q.  How can the ‘Digital India’ programme help farmers to improve farm productivity and income? What steps has the Government taken in this regard?#2015#Economic Development
Q.  In what way could replacement of price subsidy with Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) change the scenario of subsidies in India? Discuss.#2015#Economic Development
Q.  What are the impediments in marketing and supply chain management in developing the food processing industry in India? Can e-commerce help in overcoming these bottlenecks?#2015#Economic Development
Q.  Craze for gold in Indians has led to a surge in import of gold in recent years and put pressure on balance of payments and external value of rupee. In view of this, examine the merits of Gold Monetization Scheme.#2015#Economic Development
Q.  “Success of ‘Make in India’ programme depends on the success of ‘Skill India’ programme and radical labour reforms.” Discuss with logical arguments.#2015#Economic Development
Q.  To what factors can the recent dramatic fall in equipment costs and tariff of solar energy be attributed? What implications does the trend have for the thermal power producers and the related industry?#2015#Economic Development
Q.  There is a clear acknowledgement that Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are a tool of industrial development, manufacturing and exports. Recognising this potential, the whole instrumentality of SEZs require augmentation. Discuss the issues plaguing the success of SEZs with respect to taxation, governing laws and administration.#2015#Economic Development
Q.  Normally countries shift from agriculture to industry and then later to services, but India shifted directly from agriculture to services. What are the reasons for the huge growth of services vis-à-vis industry in the country? Can India become a developed country without a strong industrial base?#2014#Economic Development
Q.  “While we flaunt India’s demographic dividend, we ignore the dropping rates of employability.” What are we missing while doing so? Where will the jobs that India desperately needs come from? Explain.#2014#Economic Development
Q.  The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 has come into effect from 1st January, 2014. What are the key issues which would get addressed with the Act in place? What implications would it have on industrialization and agriculture in India?#2014#Economic Development
Q.  Capitalism has guided the world economy to unprecedented prosperity. However, it often encourages short-sightedness and contributes to wide disparities between the rich and the poor. In this light, would it be correct to believe and adopt capitalism for bringing inclusive growth in India? Discuss.#2014#Economic Development
Q.  Explain how Private Public Partnership arrangements, in long gestation infrastructure projects, can transfer unsustainable liabilities to the future. What arrangements need to be put in place to ensure that successive generations’ capacities are not compromised?#2014#Economic Development
Q.  National Urban Transport Policy emphasises on ‘moving people’ instead of ‘moving vehicles’. Discuss critically the success of the various strategies of the Government in this regard.#2014#Economic Development
Q.  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the defence sector is now set to be liberalized. What influence this is expected to have on Indian defence and economy in the short and long run?#2014#Economic Development
Q.  Should the pursuit of carbon credits and clean development mechanisms set up under UNFCCC-be maintained even though there has been a massive slide in the value of a carbon credit? Discuss with respect to India’s energy needs for economic growth.#2014#Economic Development
Q.  With a consideration towards the strategy of inclusive growth, the new Companies Bill, 2013 has indirectly made CSR a mandatory obligation. Discuss the challenges expected in its implementation in right earnest. Also discuss other provisions in the Bill and their implications.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  What were the reasons for the introduction of Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003? Discuss critically its salient features and their effectiveness.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  What is the meaning of the term ‘tax expenditure’? Taking housing sector as an example, discuss how it influences the budgetary policies of the government.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  Food Security Bill is expected to eliminate hunger and malnutrition in India. Critically discuss various apprehensions in its effective implementation along with the concerns it has generated in WTO.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  Examine the impact of liberalization on companies owned by Indians. Are they competing with the MNCs satisfactorily? Discuss.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  (a) Discuss the impact of FDI entry into Multi-trade retail sector on supply chain management in commodity trade pattern of the economy.     (b) Though India allowed Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in what is called multi-brand retail through the joint venture route in September 2012, the FDI, even after a year, has not picked up. Discuss the reasons.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  Discuss the rationale for introducing Goods and Services Tax (GST) in India. Bring out critically the reasons for the delay in roll out for its regime.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  Write a note on India’s green energy corridor to alleviate the problem of conventional energy.#2013#Economic Development
Q.  Adoption of PPP model for infrastructure development of the country has not been free of criticism. Critically discuss pros and cons of the model.#2013#Economic Development
Q. “Caste system is assuming new identities and associational forms. Hence caste system cannot be eradicated in India.” Comment.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Despite implementation of various programmes for eradication of poverty by the government in India, poverty is still existing’. Explain by giving reasons.#2018#Indian Society
Q. How the Indian concept of secularism is different from the western model of secularism? Discuss.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Women’s movement in India has not addressed the issues of women of lower social strata.’ Substantiate your view.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Globalization is generally said to promote cultural homogenization but due to this cultural specificities appear to be strengthened in the Indian Society.’ Elucidate.#2018#Indian Society
Q. ‘Communalism arises either due to power struggle or relative deprivation’. Argue by giving suitable illustrations. #2018#Indian Society
Q. In the context of the diversity of India, can it be said that the regions form cultural units rather than the States? Give reasons with examples for your viewpoint.#2017#Indian Society
Q. What are the two major legal initiatives by the State since Independence addressing discrimination against Scheduled Tribes (STs)?#2017#Indian Society
Q. The spirit of tolerance and love is not only an interesting feature of Indian society from very early times, but it is also playing an important part at the present. Elaborate.#2017#Indian Society
Q.  Distinguish between religiousness/religiosity and communalism giving one example of how the former has got transformed into the latter in independent India.#2017#Indian Society
Q.  To what extent globalisation has influenced the core of cultural diversity in India? Explain.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  “An essential condition to eradicate poverty is to liberate the poor from the process of deprivation.” Substantiate this statement with suitable examples.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  Why are the tribals in India referred to as ‘the Scheduled Tribes’? Indicate the major provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India for their upliftment.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  What is the basis of regionalism? Is it that unequal distribution of benefits of development on regional basis eventually promotes regionalism? Substantiate your answer.#2016#Indian Society
Q.  Describe any four cultural elements of diversity in India and rate their relative significance in building a national identity.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty OR poverty is the main cause of population increase in India.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  How do you explain the statistics that show that the sex ratio in Tribes in India is more favourable to women than the sex ratio among Scheduled Castes?#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the changes in the trends of labour migration within and outside India in the last four decades.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the positive and negative effects of globalization on women in India.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  Debate the issue of whether and how contemporary movements for assertion of Dalit identity work towards annihilation of caste.#2015#Indian Society
Q.  How does patriarchy impact the position of a middle class working woman in India?#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Why do some of the most prosperous regions of India have an adverse sex ratio for women? Give your arguments.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  The life cycle of a joint family depends on economic factors rather than social values. Discuss.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the various economic and socio-cultural forces that are driving increasing feminization of agriculture in India.#2014#Indian Society
Q.  How do the Indian debates on secularism differ from the debates in the West?#2014#Indian Society
Q.  Discuss the various social problems which originated out of the speedy process of urbanization in India.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  “Male membership needs to be encouraged in order to make women’s organization free from gender bias.” Comment.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  Critically examine the effect of globalization on the aged population in India.#2013#Indian Society
Q.  Growing feeling of regionalism is an important factor in generation of demand for a separate State. Discuss.#2013#Indian Society
Q. What do you mean by Minimum Support Price (MSP)? How will MSP rescue the farmers from the low income trap?   #2018#Agriculture
Q. Examine the role of supermarkets in supply chain management of fruits, vegetables, and food items. How do they eliminate number of intermediaries?#2018#Agriculture
Q. Assess the role of National Horticulture Mission (NHM) in boosting the production, productivity and income of horticulture farms. How far has it succeeded in increasing the income of farmers? #2018#Agriculture
Q. How has the emphasis on certain crops brought about changes in cropping patterns in recent past? Elaborate the emphasis on millets production and consumption.#2018#Agriculture
Q. Explain various types of revolutions, took place in Agriculture after Independence in India. How these revolutions have helped in poverty alleviation and food security in India?#2017#Agriculture
Q. What are the major reasons for declining rice and wheat yield in the cropping system? How crop diversification is helpful to stabilise the yield of the crops in the system?#2017#Agriculture
Q. How do subsidies affect the cropping pattern, crop diversity and economy of farmers? What is the significance of crop insurance, minimum support price and food processing for small and marginal farmers?#2017#Agriculture
Q. What is water-use efficiency? Describe the role of micro-irrigation in increasing the water-use efficiency.#2016#Agriculture
Q. What is allelopathy? Discuss its role in major cropping systems of irrigated agriculture.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Discuss the role of land reforms in agricultural development Identify the factors that were responsible for the success of land reforms in India.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Given the vulnerability of Indian agriculture to vagaries of nature, discuss the need for crop insurance and bring out the salient features of the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY).#2016#Agriculture
Q.  Livestock rearing has a big potential for providing non-farm employment and income in rural areas. Discuss suggesting suitable measures to promote this sector in India.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  In view of the declining average size of land holdings in India which has made agriculture non–viable for a majority of farmers, should contract farming and land leasing be promoted in agriculture? Critically evaluate the pros and cons.#2016#Agriculture
Q.  There is also a point of view that Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMCs) set up under the State Acts have not only impeded the development of agriculture but also have been the cause of food inflation in India. Critically examine.#2014#Agriculture
Q.  “In the villages itself no form of credit organization will be suitable except the cooperative society.” — All India Rural Credit Survey. Discuss this statement in the background of agricultural finance in India. What constraints and challenges do financial institutions supplying agricultural finance face? How can technology be used to better reach and serve rural clients?#2014#Agriculture
Q.  What are the different types of agriculture subsidies given to farmers at the national and at state levels? Critically analyse the agricultural subsidy regime with reference to the distortions created by it.#2013#Agriculture
Q.  India needs to strengthen measures to promote the pink revolution in food industry for ensuring better nutrition and health. Critically elucidate the statement.#2013#Agriculture
Q.  Establish relationship between land reforms, agriculture productivity and elimination of poverty in the Indian economy. Discuss the difficulties in designing and implementation of agriculture friendly land reforms in India.#2013#Agriculture
Q. Safeguarding the Indian art heritage is the need of the moment. Discuss.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. The Bhakti movement received a remarkable re-orientation with the advent of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Discuss.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Assess the importance of the accounts of the Chinese and Arab travellers in the reconstruction of the history of India.#2018#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. How do you justify the view that the level of excellence of the Gupta numismatic art is not at all noticeable in later times?#2017#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Early Buddhist Stupa-art, while depicting folk motifs and narratives successfully expounds Buddhist ideals. Elucidate.#2016#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Krishnadeva Raya, the King of Vijayanagar, was not only an accomplished scholar himself but was also a great patron of learning and literature. Discuss.#2016#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. The ancient civilization in Indian sub-continent differed from those of Egypt, Mesopotamia and Greece in that its culture and traditions have been preserved without a breakdown to the present day. Comment.#2015#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. Mesolithic rock cut architecture of India not only reflects the cultural life of the times but also a fine aesthetic sense comparable to modern painting. Critically evaluate this comment.#2015#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q. To what extent has the urban planning and culture of the Indus Valley Civilization provided inputs to the present day urbanization? Discuss.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Gandhara sculpture owed as much to the Romans as to the Greeks. Explain.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Taxila university was one of the oldest universities of the world with which were associated a number of renowned learned personalities of different disciplines. Its strategic location caused its fame to flourish, but unlike Nalanda, it is not considered as a university in the modern sense. Discuss.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Sufis and medieval mystic saints failed to modify either the religious ideas and practices or the outward structure of Hindu / Muslim societies to any appreciable extent. Comment.#2014#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  Though not very useful from the point of view of a connected political history of South India, the Sangam literature portrays the social and economic conditions of its time with remarkable vividness. Comment.#2013#Ancient History and Art & Culture
Q.  (a) Discuss the ‘Tandava’ dance as recorded in early Indian inscriptions.     (b) Chola architecture represents a high watermark in the evolution of temple architecture. Discuss.#2013#Ancient History and Art & Culture